10 This is the history of Noah’s sons, Shem, Ham, and Jaʹpheth.Sons were born to them after the Flood. 2 The sons of Jaʹpheth were Goʹmer, Maʹgog, Maʹda·i, Jaʹvan, Tuʹbal, Meʹshech, and Tiʹras.3 The sons of Goʹmer were Ashʹke·naz, Riʹphath, and To·garʹmah.4 The sons of Jaʹvan were E·liʹshah, Tarʹshish, Kitʹtim, and Doʹda·nim.5 From these the inhabitants of the islands spread into their lands, according to their languages and their families and by their nations.6 The sons of Ham were Cush, Mizʹra·im, Put, and Caʹnaan.7 The sons of Cush were Seʹba, Havʹi·lah, Sabʹtah, Raʹa·mah, and Sabʹte·ca.The sons of Raʹa·mah were Sheʹba and Deʹdan.8 Cush became father to Nimʹrod. He was the first to become a mighty one on the earth. 9 He became a mighty hunter in opposition to Jehovah. That is why there is a saying: “Just like Nimʹrod, a mighty hunter in opposition to Jehovah.” 10 The beginning of his kingdom was Baʹbel, Eʹrech, Acʹcad, and Calʹneh, in the land of Shiʹnar. 11 From that land he went into As·syrʹi·a and built Ninʹe·veh, Re·hoʹboth-Ir, Caʹlah, 12 and Reʹsen, between Ninʹe·veh and Caʹlah: This is the great city.13 Mizʹra·im became father to Luʹdim, Anʹa·mim, Le·haʹbim, Naph·tuʹhim, 14 Path·ruʹsim, Cas·luʹhim (from whom the Phi·lisʹtines came), and Caphʹto·rim.15 Caʹnaan became father to Siʹdon, his firstborn, and Heth, 16 as well as the Jebʹu·site, the Amʹor·ite, the Girʹga·shite, 17 the Hiʹvite, the Arkʹite, the Siʹnite, 18 the Arʹvad·ite, the Zemʹa·rite, and the Haʹmath·ite. Afterward, the families of the Caʹnaan·ites were scattered. 19 So the boundary of the Caʹnaan·ites was from Siʹdon as far as Geʹrar, near Gazʹa, as far as Sodʹom, Go·morʹrah, Adʹmah, and Ze·boiʹim, near Laʹsha. 20 These were the sons of Ham according to their families and their languages, by their lands and their nations.21 Children were also born to Shem, the forefather of all the sons of Eʹber and the brother of Jaʹpheth the oldest. 22 The sons of Shem were Eʹlam, Asʹshur, Ar·pachʹshad, Lud, and Aʹram.23 The sons of Aʹram were Uz, Hul, Geʹther, and Mash.24 Ar·pachʹshad became father to Sheʹlah, and Sheʹlah became father to Eʹber.25 Two sons were born to Eʹber. The name of the one was Peʹleg, because in his lifetime the earth was divided. The name of his brother was Jokʹtan.26 Jokʹtan became father to Al·moʹdad, Sheʹleph, Ha·zar·maʹveth, Jeʹrah, 27 Ha·doʹram, Uʹzal, Dikʹlah, 28 Oʹbal, A·bimʹa·el, Sheʹba, 29 Oʹphir, Havʹi·lah, and Joʹbab; all of these were the sons of Jokʹtan.30 Their place of dwelling extended from Meʹsha as far as Seʹphar, the mountainous region of the East.31 These were the sons of Shem according to their families and their languages, by their lands and their nations.32 These were the families of the sons of Noah according to their family lines and by their nations. From these the nations were spread abroad in the earth after the Flood.
11 Now all the earth continued to be of one language and of one set of words. 2 As they traveled eastward, they discovered a valley plain in the land of Shiʹnar, and they began dwelling there. 3 Then they said to one another: “Come! Let us make bricks and bake them with fire.” So they used bricks instead of stone, and bitumen as mortar. 4 They now said: “Come! Let us build a city for ourselves and a tower with its top in the heavens, and let us make a celebrated name for ourselves, so that we will not be scattered over the entire face of the earth.”5 Then Jehovah went down to see the city and the tower that the sons of men had built. 6 Jehovah then said: “Look! They are one people with one language, and this is what they have started to do. Now there is nothing that they may have in mind to do that will be impossible for them. 7 Come! Let us go down there and confuse their language in order that they may not understand one another’s language.” 8 So Jehovah scattered them from there over the entire face of the earth, and they gradually left off building the city. 9 That is why it was named Baʹbel, because there Jehovah confused the language of all the earth, and Jehovah scattered them from there over the entire face of the earth.10 This is the history of Shem.Shem was 100 years old when he became father to Ar·pachʹshad two years after the Flood. 11 After becoming father to Ar·pachʹshad, Shem continued to live 500 years. And he became father to sons and daughters.12 Ar·pachʹshad lived for 35 years and then became father to Sheʹlah. 13 After becoming father to Sheʹlah, Ar·pachʹshad continued to live 403 years. And he became father to sons and daughters.14 Sheʹlah lived for 30 years and then became father to Eʹber. 15 After becoming father to Eʹber, Sheʹlah continued to live 403 years. And he became father to sons and daughters.16 Eʹber lived for 34 years and then became father to Peʹleg. 17 After becoming father to Peʹleg, Eʹber continued to live 430 years. And he became father to sons and daughters.18 Peʹleg lived for 30 years and then became father to Reʹu. 19 After becoming father to Reʹu, Peʹleg continued to live 209 years. And he became father to sons and daughters.20 Reʹu lived for 32 years and then became father to Seʹrug. 21 After becoming father to Seʹrug, Reʹu continued to live 207 years. And he became father to sons and daughters.22 Seʹrug lived for 30 years and then became father to Naʹhor. 23 After becoming father to Naʹhor, Seʹrug continued to live 200 years. And he became father to sons and daughters.24 Naʹhor lived for 29 years and then became father to Teʹrah. 25 After becoming father to Teʹrah, Naʹhor continued to live 119 years. And he became father to sons and daughters.26 Teʹrah lived for 70 years, after which he became father to Aʹbram, Naʹhor, and Haʹran.27 This is the history of Teʹrah.Teʹrah became father to Aʹbram, Naʹhor, and Haʹran; and Haʹran became father to Lot. 28 While his father Teʹrah was still alive, Haʹran died in the land of his birth, in Ur of the Chal·deʹans. 29 Aʹbram and Naʹhor took wives for themselves. The name of Aʹbram’s wife was Sarʹai, and the name of Naʹhor’s wife was Milʹcah, the daughter of Haʹran, the father of Milʹcah and Isʹcah. 30 Now Sarʹai was barren; she had no child.31 Teʹrah then took Aʹbram his son and Lot his grandson, the son of Haʹran, and Sarʹai his daughter-in-law, the wife of Aʹbram his son, and they went with him out of Ur of the Chal·deʹans to go to the land of Caʹnaan. In time they came to Haʹran and began dwelling there. 32 The days of Teʹrah were 205 years. Then Teʹrah died in Haʹran.
12 And Jehovah said to Aʹbram: “Go out from your land and away from your relatives and from the house of your father to the land that I will show you. 2 I will make you a great nation, and I will bless you, and I will make your name great, and you will become a blessing. 3 I will bless those who bless you, and I will curse him who calls down evil on you, and all the families of the ground will certainly be blessed by means of you.”4 So Aʹbram went just as Jehovah had told him, and Lot went with him. Aʹbram was 75 years old when he left Haʹran. 5 Aʹbram took his wife Sarʹai and Lot the son of his brother and all the goods that they had accumulated and the people whom they had acquired in Haʹran, and they set out for the land of Caʹnaan. When they reached the land of Caʹnaan, 6 Aʹbram traveled through the land as far as the site of Sheʹchem, near the big trees of Moʹreh. At that time the Caʹnaan·ites were in the land. 7 Jehovah then appeared to Aʹbram and said: “To your offspring I am going to give this land.” So he built an altar there to Jehovah, who had appeared to him. 8 Later he moved from there to the mountainous region east of Bethʹel and pitched his tent with Bethʹel on the west and Aʹi on the east. There he built an altar to Jehovah and began to call on the name of Jehovah. 9 Afterward, Aʹbram broke camp and journeyed toward the Negʹeb, moving his camp from one place to another.10 Now a famine arose in the land, and Aʹbram went down toward Egypt to reside there for a while, because the famine in the land was severe. 11 As he was about to enter Egypt, he said to his wife Sarʹai: “Please listen! I know what a beautiful woman you are. 12 So when the Egyptians see you, they will surely say, ‘This is his wife.’ Then they will kill me but keep you alive. 13 Please say you are my sister, so that it may go well with me because of you, and my life will be spared.”14 As soon as Aʹbram entered Egypt, the Egyptians noticed that the woman was very beautiful. 15 And the princes of Pharʹaoh also saw her, and they began praising her to Pharʹaoh, so that the woman was taken to the house of Pharʹaoh. 16 He treated Aʹbram well because of her, and he acquired sheep, cattle, male and female donkeys, male and female servants, and camels. 17 Then Jehovah struck Pharʹaoh and his household with severe plagues because of Sarʹai, Aʹbram’s wife. 18 So Pharʹaoh called Aʹbram and said: “What is this you have done to me? Why did you not tell me that she was your wife? 19 Why did you say, ‘She is my sister,’ so that I was about to take her as my wife? Here is your wife. Take her and go!” 20 So Pharʹaoh gave his men orders concerning him, and they sent him away with his wife and all that he had.
13 Aʹbram then went up out of Egypt to the Negʹeb, he and his wife and all that he had, together with Lot. 2 Aʹbram was very rich in livestock, silver, and gold. 3 He camped in one place after another as he traveled from the Negʹeb to Bethʹel, until he arrived at the place where his tent had been between Bethʹel and Aʹi, 4 to the place where he had previously built an altar. There Aʹbram called on the name of Jehovah.5 Now Lot, who was traveling with Aʹbram, also owned sheep, cattle, and tents. 6 So the land did not allow for all of them to stay in the same place; their goods had become so many that they could no longer dwell together. 7 As a result, a quarrel arose between the herders of Aʹbram’s livestock and the herders of Lot’s livestock. (At that time the Caʹnaan·ites and the Perʹiz·zites were dwelling in the land.) 8 So Aʹbram said to Lot: “Please, there should be no quarreling between me and you and between my herdsmen and your herdsmen, for we are brothers. 9 Is not the whole land available to you? Please, separate from me. If you go to the left, then I will go to the right; but if you go to the right, then I will go to the left.” 10 So Lot raised his eyes and saw that the whole district of the Jordan was a well-watered region (before Jehovah destroyed Sodʹom and Go·morʹrah), like the garden of Jehovah, like the land of Egypt, as far as Zoʹar. 11 Then Lot chose for himself the whole district of the Jordan, and Lot moved his camp to the east. So they separated from each other. 12 Aʹbram lived in the land of Caʹnaan, but Lot lived among the cities of the district. Finally he set up his tent near Sodʹom. 13 Now the men of Sodʹom were wicked, gross sinners against Jehovah.14 Jehovah said to Aʹbram, after Lot had separated from him: “Raise your eyes, please, and look from the place where you are, to the north and south, east and west, 15 because all the land that you see, I will give to you and your offspring as a lasting possession. 16 And I will make your offspring like the dust particles of the earth, so that if anyone could count the dust particles of the earth, then your offspring could be counted. 17 Get up, travel through the length and breadth of the land, for to you I am going to give it.” 18 So Aʹbram continued to live in tents. Later he came and dwelled among the big trees of Mamʹre, which are in Hebʹron, and there he built an altar to Jehovah.
14 Now in the days of Amʹra·phel king of Shiʹnar, Arʹi·och king of El·laʹsar, Ched·or·la·oʹmer king of Eʹlam, and Tiʹdal king of Goiʹim, 2 these made war with Beʹra king of Sodʹom, Birʹsha king of Go·morʹrah, Shiʹnab king of Adʹmah, Shem·eʹber king of Ze·boiʹim, and the king of Beʹla, that is, Zoʹar. 3 All of these joined forces at the Valley of Sidʹdim, that is, the Salt Sea.4 They had served Ched·or·la·oʹmer for 12 years, but they rebelled in the 13th year. 5 So in the 14th year, Ched·or·la·oʹmer and the kings who were with him came and defeated the Rephʹa·im in Ashʹte·roth-kar·naʹim, the Zuʹzim in Ham, the Eʹmim in Shaʹveh-kir·i·a·thaʹim, 6 and the Horʹites in their mountain of Seʹir down to El-paʹran, which is at the wilderness. 7 Then they turned back and came to En-mishʹpat, that is, Kaʹdesh, and conquered the whole territory of the A·malʹek·ites and also the Amʹor·ites who were dwelling in Hazʹa·zon-taʹmar.8 At this point, the king of Sodʹom went on the march, and also the king of Go·morʹrah, the king of Adʹmah, the king of Ze·boiʹim, and the king of Beʹla, that is, Zoʹar, and they drew up in battle formation against them in the Valley of Sidʹdim, 9 against Ched·or·la·oʹmer king of Eʹlam, Tiʹdal king of Goiʹim, Amʹra·phel king of Shiʹnar, and Arʹi·och king of El·laʹsar—four kings against the five. 10 Now the Valley of Sidʹdim was full of bitumen pits, and the kings of Sodʹom and Go·morʹrah tried to escape and fell into them, and those who remained fled to the mountainous region. 11 Then the victors took all the goods of Sodʹom and Go·morʹrah and all their food and went on their way. 12 They also took Lot, the son of Aʹbram’s brother who was dwelling in Sodʹom, as well as his goods, and they continued on their way.13 After that a man who had escaped came and told Aʹbram the Hebrew. He was then dwelling among the big trees of Mamʹre the Amʹor·ite, the brother of Eshʹcol and Aʹner. These men were allies of Aʹbram. 14 Thus Aʹbram heard that his relative had been taken captive. With that he mobilized his trained men, 318 servants born in his household, and went in pursuit up to Dan. 15 During the night, he divided his forces, and he and his servants attacked and defeated them. And he pursued them up to Hoʹbah, which is north of Damascus. 16 He recovered all the goods, and he also recovered Lot his relative, his goods, the women, and the other people.17 After Aʹbram returned from defeating Ched·or·la·oʹmer and the kings who were with him, the king of Sodʹom went out to meet Aʹbram at the Valley of Shaʹveh, that is, the Valley of the King. 18 And Mel·chizʹe·dek king of Saʹlem brought out bread and wine; he was priest of the Most High God.19 Then he blessed him and said:“Blessed be Aʹbram by the Most High God,Maker of heaven and earth;20 And praised be the Most High God,Who has handed your oppressors over to you!”And Aʹbram gave him a tenth of everything.21 After that the king of Sodʹom said to Aʹbram: “Give me the people, but take the goods for yourself.” 22 But Aʹbram said to the king of Sodʹom: “I raise my hand in an oath to Jehovah the Most High God, Maker of heaven and earth, 23 that I will not take anything that is yours, from a thread to a sandal lace, so that you may not say, ‘I made Aʹbram rich.’ 24 I will take nothing except what the young men have already eaten. As for the share of the men who went with me, Aʹner, Eshʹcol, and Mamʹre—let them take their share.”
15 After this the word of Jehovah came to Aʹbram in a vision, saying: “Do not fear, Aʹbram. I am a shield for you. Your reward will be very great.” 2 Aʹbram replied: “Sovereign Lord Jehovah, what will you give me, seeing that I continue childless and the one who will inherit my house is a man of Damascus, E·li·eʹzer?” 3 Aʹbram added: “You have given me no offspring, and a member of my household is succeeding me as heir.” 4 But look! Jehovah’s word in reply to him was, “This man will not succeed you as heir, but your own son will succeed you as heir.”5 He now brought him outside and said: “Look up, please, to the heavens and count the stars, if you are able to do so.” Then he said to him: “So your offspring will become.” 6 And he put faith in Jehovah, and He counted it to him as righteousness. 7 Then he added: “I am Jehovah, who brought you out of Ur of the Chal·deʹans to give you this land as your possession.” 8 To this he said: “Sovereign Lord Jehovah, how will I know that I will take possession of it?” 9 He replied to him: “Take for me a three-year-old heifer, a three-year-old female goat, a three-year-old ram, a turtledove, and a young pigeon.” 10 So he took all of these and cut them in two and put each part opposite the other, but he did not cut up the birds. 11 Then the birds of prey began to descend on the carcasses, but Aʹbram kept driving them away.12 When the sun was about to set, a deep sleep fell upon Aʹbram and a great and frightening darkness descended on him. 13 Then He said to Aʹbram: “Know for certain that your offspring will be foreigners in a land not theirs and that the people there will enslave them and afflict them for 400 years. 14 But I will judge the nation they will serve, and after that they will go out with many goods. 15 As for you, you will go to your forefathers in peace; you will be buried at a good old age. 16 But they will return here in the fourth generation, because the error of the Amʹor·ites has not yet reached its full measure.”17 When the sun had set and it had become very dark, a smoking furnace appeared, and a fiery torch passed between the pieces. 18 On that day Jehovah made with Aʹbram a covenant, saying: “To your offspring I will give this land, from the river of Egypt to the great river, the river Eu·phraʹtes: 19 the land of the Kenʹites, the Kenʹiz·zites, the Kadʹmon·ites, 20 the Hitʹtites, the Perʹiz·zites, the Rephʹa·im, 21 the Amʹor·ites, the Caʹnaan·ites, the Girʹga·shites, and the Jebʹu·sites.”
16 Now Aʹbram’s wife Sarʹai had borne him no children, but she had an Egyptian servant whose name was Haʹgar. 2 So Sarʹai said to Aʹbram: “Please now! Jehovah has prevented me from bearing children. Please, have relations with my servant. Perhaps I can have children by means of her.” So Aʹbram listened to what Sarʹai said. 3 After Aʹbram had lived for ten years in the land of Caʹnaan, Aʹbram’s wife Sarʹai took her Egyptian servant Haʹgar and gave her to her husband Aʹbram as his wife. 4 So he had relations with Haʹgar, and she became pregnant. When she realized that she was pregnant, she began to despise her mistress.5 At this Sarʹai said to Aʹbram: “The injury done to me is your fault. I was the one who put my servant in your arms, but when she realized that she was pregnant, she began to despise me. May Jehovah judge between me and you.” 6 So Aʹbram said to Sarʹai: “Look! Your servant is under your authority. Do to her whatever you think is best.” Then Sarʹai humiliated her, and she ran away from her.7 Later Jehovah’s angel found her at a spring of waters in the wilderness, the spring on the way to Shur. 8 And he said: “Haʹgar, servant of Sarʹai, where have you come from and where are you going?” To this she said: “I am running away from my mistress Sarʹai.” 9 Jehovah’s angel then said to her: “Return to your mistress and humble yourself under her hand.” 10 Then Jehovah’s angel said: “I will greatly multiply your offspring, so that they will be too numerous to count.” 11 Jehovah’s angel added: “Here you are pregnant, and you will give birth to a son, and you must name him Ishʹma·el, for Jehovah has heard your affliction. 12 He will be a wild donkey of a man. His hand will be against everyone, and everyone’s hand will be against him, and he will dwell opposite all his brothers.”13 Then she called on the name of Jehovah, who was speaking to her: “You are a God of sight,” for she said: “Have I here actually looked upon the one who sees me?” 14 That is why the well was called Beʹer-laʹhai-roi. (It is between Kaʹdesh and Beʹred.) 15 So Haʹgar bore to Aʹbram a son, and Aʹbram named his son, whom Haʹgar bore, Ishʹma·el. 16 Aʹbram was 86 years old when Haʹgar bore Ishʹma·el to him.
17 When Aʹbram was 99 years old, Jehovah appeared to Aʹbram and said to him: “I am God Almighty. Walk before me and prove yourself faultless. 2 I will establish my covenant between me and you, and I will multiply you very, very much.”3 At this Aʹbram fell facedown, and God continued to speak with him, saying: 4 “As for me, look! my covenant is with you, and you will certainly become a father of many nations. 5 Your name will no longer be Aʹbram; your name will become Abraham, for I will make you a father of many nations. 6 I will make you very, very fruitful and will make you become nations, and kings will come from you.7 “And I will keep my covenant between me and you and your offspring after you throughout their generations for an everlasting covenant, to be God to you and to your offspring after you. 8 And I will give to you and to your offspring after you the land in which you lived as a foreigner—the entire land of Caʹnaan—for a lasting possession, and I will be their God.”9 God said further to Abraham: “As for you, you are to keep my covenant, you and your offspring after you throughout their generations. 10 This is my covenant between me and you, that you and your offspring after you will keep: Every male among you must get circumcised. 11 You must circumcise the flesh of your foreskins, and it will serve as a sign of the covenant between me and you. 12 Throughout your generations, every male among you eight days old must be circumcised, anyone who is born in the house and anyone who is not one of your offspring and who was purchased with money from a foreigner. 13 Every man born in your house and every man purchased with your money must be circumcised, and my covenant in your flesh must serve as a lasting covenant. 14 If any uncircumcised male will not circumcise the flesh of his foreskin, that person must be cut off from his people. He has broken my covenant.”15 Then God said to Abraham: “As for your wife Sarʹai, you must not call her Sarʹai, because Sarah will become her name. 16 I will bless her and also give you a son by her; I will bless her and she will become nations; kings of peoples will come from her.” 17 At this Abraham fell facedown and began to laugh and to say in his heart: “Will a man 100 years old have a child born to him, and will Sarah, a woman 90 years old, give birth?”18 So Abraham said to the true God: “O that Ishʹma·el might live before you!” 19 To this God said: “Your wife Sarah will definitely bear you a son, and you must name him Isaac. And I will establish my covenant with him for an everlasting covenant to his offspring after him. 20 But as regards Ishʹma·el, I have heard you. Look! I will bless him and will make him fruitful and will multiply him very, very much. He will produce 12 chieftains, and I will make him become a great nation. 21 However, I will establish my covenant with Isaac, whom Sarah will bear to you at this appointed time next year.”22 When God finished speaking with him, he went up from Abraham. 23 Abraham then took Ishʹma·el his son and all the men born in his house and everyone he had purchased with money, every male in the household of Abraham, and he circumcised the flesh of their foreskins on that very day, just as God had spoken with him. 24 Abraham was 99 years old when he had the flesh of his foreskin circumcised. 25 And Ishʹma·el his son was 13 years old when he had the flesh of his foreskin circumcised. 26 On that very day, Abraham was circumcised and also his son Ishʹma·el. 27 All the men of his household, anyone born in the house and anyone purchased with money from a foreigner, were also circumcised with him.
18 Afterward, Jehovah appeared to him among the big trees of Mamʹre while he was sitting at the entrance of the tent during the hottest part of the day. 2 He looked up and saw three men standing some distance from him. When he saw them, he ran from the entrance of the tent to meet them, and he bowed down to the ground. 3 Then he said: “Jehovah, if I have found favor in your eyes, please do not pass by your servant. 4 Please, let a little water be brought and have your feet washed; then recline under the tree. 5 Seeing that you have come here to your servant, let me bring a piece of bread so that you may refresh yourselves. Then you may go on your way.” At this they said: “All right. You may do as you have spoken.”6 So Abraham hurried to the tent to Sarah and said: “Quick! Get three measures of fine flour, knead the dough, and make loaves of bread.” 7 Next Abraham ran to the herd and chose a tender and good young bull. He gave it to the attendant, who hurried to prepare it. 8 He then took butter and milk and the young bull that he had prepared and set the food before them. Then he stood by them under the tree as they were eating.9 They said to him: “Where is your wife Sarah?” He replied: “Here in the tent.” 10 So one of them continued: “I will surely return to you next year at this time, and look! your wife Sarah will have a son.” Now Sarah was listening at the tent entrance, which was behind the man. 11 Abraham and Sarah were old, being advanced in years. Sarah was past the age of childbearing. 12 So Sarah began to laugh to herself, saying: “After I am worn out and my lord is old, will I really have this pleasure?” 13 Then Jehovah said to Abraham: “Why did Sarah laugh and say, ‘Am I really going to give birth even though I am old?’ 14 Is anything too extraordinary for Jehovah? I will return to you next year at this appointed time, and Sarah will have a son.” 15 But Sarah denied it, saying, “I did not laugh!” for she was afraid. At this he said: “Yes! You did laugh.”16 When the men got up to leave and looked down toward Sodʹom, Abraham was walking with them to escort them. 17 Jehovah said: “Am I keeping hidden from Abraham what I am going to do? 18 Why, Abraham is surely going to become a great and mighty nation, and all the nations of the earth will be blessed by means of him. 19 For I have come to know him in order that he may command his sons and his household after him to keep Jehovah’s way by doing what is right and just, so that Jehovah may bring about what he has promised concerning Abraham.”20 Then Jehovah said: “The outcry against Sodʹom and Go·morʹrah is indeed great, and their sin is very heavy. 21 I will go down to see whether they are acting according to the outcry that has reached me. And if not, I can get to know it.”22 Then the men left from there and went toward Sodʹom, but Jehovah remained with Abraham. 23 Then Abraham approached and said: “Will you really sweep away the righteous with the wicked? 24 Suppose there are 50 righteous men within the city. Will you, then, sweep them away and not pardon the place for the sake of the 50 righteous who are inside it? 25 It is unthinkable that you would act in this manner by putting the righteous man to death with the wicked one so that the outcome for the righteous man and the wicked is the same! It is unthinkable of you. Will the Judge of all the earth not do what is right?” 26 Then Jehovah said: “If I find in Sodʹom 50 righteous men in the city, I will pardon the whole place for their sake.” 27 But Abraham again responded: “Please, here I have presumed to speak to Jehovah, whereas I am dust and ashes. 28 Suppose the 50 righteous should lack five. Because of the five will you destroy the whole city?” To this he said: “I will not destroy it if I find there 45.”29 But yet again he spoke to him and said: “Suppose 40 are found there.” He answered: “I will not do it for the sake of the 40.” 30 But he continued: “Jehovah, please, do not become hot with anger, but let me go on speaking: Suppose only 30 are found there.” He answered: “I will not do it if I find 30 there.” 31 But he continued: “Please, here I have presumed to speak to Jehovah: Suppose only 20 are found there.” He answered: “I will not destroy it for the sake of the 20.” 32 Finally he said: “Jehovah, please, do not become hot with anger, but let me speak just once more: Suppose only ten are found there.” He answered: “I will not destroy it for the sake of the ten.” 33 When Jehovah finished speaking to Abraham, he went his way and Abraham returned to his place.
19 The two angels arrived at Sodʹom by evening, and Lot was sitting in the gate of Sodʹom. When Lot saw them, he got up to meet them and bowed down with his face to the earth. 2 And he said: “Please, my lords, turn aside, please, into the house of your servant and stay overnight and have your feet washed. Then you may get up early and travel on your way.” To this they said: “No, we will stay overnight in the public square.” 3 But he was so insistent with them that they went with him to his house. Then he made a feast for them, and he baked unleavened bread, and they ate.4 Before they could lie down to sleep, the men of the city—the men of Sodʹom from boy to old man, all of them—surrounded the house in one mob. 5 And they kept calling out to Lot and saying to him: “Where are the men who came in to you tonight? Bring them out to us so that we may have sex with them.”6 Then Lot went out to them to the doorway, and he shut the door behind him. 7 He said: “Please, my brothers, do not act wickedly. 8 Please, here I have two daughters who have never had sexual relations with a man. Please, let me bring them out to you for you to do to them whatever seems good to you. But do not do anything to these men, for they have come under the shelter of my roof.” 9 At this they said: “Stand back!” And they added: “This lone foreigner came to live here, and yet he dares to judge us! Now we are going to do worse to you than to them.” And they crowded in on Lot and moved forward to break down the door. 10 So the men reached out their hands and brought Lot into the house with them, and they shut the door. 11 But they struck the men who were at the entrance of the house with blindness, from the least to the greatest, so that they wore themselves out trying to find the doorway.12 Then the men said to Lot: “Do you have anyone else here? Sons-in-law, your sons, your daughters, and all your people in the city, bring out of this place! 13 For we are going to destroy this place, because the outcry against them has indeed grown great before Jehovah, so that Jehovah sent us to destroy the city.” 14 So Lot went out and began to speak to his sons-in-law who were to marry his daughters, and he kept saying: “Get up! Get out of this place, because Jehovah will destroy the city!” But to his sons-in-law, he seemed to be joking.15 As dawn was breaking, the angels became urgent with Lot, saying: “Get up! Take your wife and your two daughters who are here with you, so that you will not be swept away in the error of the city!” 16 When he kept lingering, then because of Jehovah’s compassion for him, the men seized hold of his hand and the hand of his wife and the hands of his two daughters, and they brought him out and stationed him outside the city. 17 As soon as they had brought them to the outskirts, he said: “Escape for your life! Do not look behind you and do not stand still in any part of the district! Escape to the mountainous region so that you may not be swept away!”18 Then Lot said to them: “Not there, please, Jehovah! 19 Please, now, your servant has found favor in your eyes and you are showing great kindness to me by preserving me alive, but I am not able to flee to the mountainous region because I am afraid that disaster may overtake me and I will die. 20 Please, now, this town is nearby and I can flee there; it is only a small place. May I, please, escape there? It is only a small place. Then I will survive.” 21 So he said to him: “Very well, I will also show you consideration by not overthrowing the town you speak of. 22 Hurry! Escape there, because I cannot do anything until you arrive there!” That is why he named the town Zoʹar.23 The sun had risen over the land when Lot arrived at Zoʹar. 24 Then Jehovah made it rain sulfur and fire on Sodʹom and Go·morʹrah—it came from Jehovah, from the heavens. 25 So he overthrew these cities, yes, the entire district, including all the inhabitants of the cities and the plants of the ground. 26 But Lot’s wife, who was behind him, began to look back, and she became a pillar of salt.27 Now Abraham got up early in the morning and went to the place where he had stood before Jehovah. 28 When he looked down toward Sodʹom and Go·morʹrah and all the land of the district, he saw quite a sight. There was dense smoke rising from the land like the dense smoke of a kiln! 29 So when God destroyed the cities of the district, God kept Abraham in mind by sending Lot out from the cities he overthrew, the cities where Lot had been dwelling.30 Later Lot went up from Zoʹar with his two daughters and began living in the mountainous region, because he was afraid to live in Zoʹar. So he began living in a cave with his two daughters. 31 And the firstborn said to the younger: “Our father is old, and there is not a man in the land to have relations with us according to the custom of the whole earth. 32 Come, let us give our father wine to drink, and let us lie down with him and preserve offspring from our father.”33 So that night they kept giving their father wine to drink; then the firstborn went in and lay down with her father, but he did not know when she lay down and when she got up. 34 Then on the next day, the firstborn said to the younger: “Here I lay down with my father last night. Let us give him wine to drink tonight also. Then you go in and lie down with him, and let us preserve offspring from our father.” 35 So that night also, they repeatedly gave their father wine to drink; then the younger went and lay down with him, but he did not know when she lay down and when she got up. 36 So both daughters of Lot became pregnant by their father. 37 The firstborn gave birth to a son and named him Moʹab. He is the father of the Moʹab·ites of today. 38 The younger also gave birth to a son, and she named him Ben-amʹmi. He is the father of the Amʹmon·ites of today.
2 Thus the heavens and the earth and everything in them were completed. 2 And by the seventh day, God had completed the work that he had been doing, and he began to rest on the seventh day from all his work that he had been doing. 3 And God went on to bless the seventh day and to declare it sacred, for on it God has been resting from all the work that he has created, all that he purposed to make.4 This is a history of the heavens and the earth in the time they were created, in the day that Jehovah God made earth and heaven.5 No bush of the field was yet on the earth and no vegetation of the field had begun sprouting, because Jehovah God had not made it rain on the earth and there was no man to cultivate the ground. 6 But a mist would go up from the earth, and it watered the entire surface of the ground.7 And Jehovah God went on to form the man out of dust from the ground and to blow into his nostrils the breath of life, and the man became a living person. 8 Further, Jehovah God planted a garden in Eʹden, toward the east; and there he put the man whom he had formed. 9 Thus Jehovah God made to grow out of the ground every tree that was pleasing to look at and good for food and also the tree of life in the middle of the garden and the tree of the knowledge of good and bad.10 Now there was a river flowing out of Eʹden to water the garden, and from there it divided into four rivers. 11 The name of the first is Piʹshon; it is the one encircling the entire land of Havʹi·lah, where there is gold. 12 The gold of that land is good. Bdellium gum and onyx stone are also there. 13 The name of the second river is Giʹhon; it is the one encircling the entire land of Cush. 14 The name of the third river is Hidʹde·kel; it is the one going to the east of As·syrʹi·a. And the fourth river is the Eu·phraʹtes.15 Jehovah God took the man and settled him in the garden of Eʹden to cultivate it and to take care of it. 16 Jehovah God also gave this command to the man: “From every tree of the garden you may eat to satisfaction. 17 But as for the tree of the knowledge of good and bad, you must not eat from it, for in the day you eat from it you will certainly die.”18 Then Jehovah God said: “It is not good for the man to continue to be alone. I am going to make a helper for him, as a complement of him.” 19 Now Jehovah God had been forming from the ground every wild animal of the field and every flying creature of the heavens, and he began bringing them to the man to see what he would call each one; and whatever the man would call each living creature, that became its name. 20 So the man named all the domestic animals and the flying creatures of the heavens and every wild animal of the field, but for man there was no helper as a complement of him. 21 So Jehovah God caused the man to fall into a deep sleep, and while he was sleeping, he took one of his ribs and then closed up the flesh over its place. 22 And Jehovah God built the rib that he had taken from the man into a woman, and he brought her to the man.23 Then the man said:“This is at last bone of my bonesAnd flesh of my flesh.This one will be called Woman,Because from man she was taken.”24 That is why a man will leave his father and his mother and he will stick to his wife, and they will become one flesh. 25 And both of them continued to be naked, the man and his wife; yet they were not ashamed.
20 Now Abraham moved his camp from there to the land of the Negʹeb and began dwelling between Kaʹdesh and Shur. While he was residing at Geʹrar, 2 Abraham repeated concerning his wife Sarah: “She is my sister.” So A·bimʹe·lech king of Geʹrar sent for Sarah and took her. 3 Afterward, God came by night to A·bimʹe·lech in a dream and said to him: “Here you are as good as dead because of the woman whom you have taken, since she is married and belongs to another man.” 4 However, A·bimʹe·lech had not gone near her. So he said: “Jehovah, will you kill a nation that is really innocent? 5 Did he not say to me, ‘She is my sister,’ and did she too not say, ‘He is my brother’? I did this with an honest heart and innocent hands.” 6 Then the true God said to him in the dream: “I know that you did this with an honest heart, so I held you back from sinning against me. That is why I did not allow you to touch her. 7 Now return the man’s wife, for he is a prophet, and he will make supplication for you and you will keep living. But if you are not returning her, know that you will surely die, you and all who are yours.”8 A·bimʹe·lech got up early in the morning and called all his servants and told them all these things, and they became very frightened. 9 Then A·bimʹe·lech called Abraham and said to him: “What have you done to us? What sin have I committed against you that you would bring upon me and my kingdom such a great sin? What you have done to me was not right.” 10 And A·bimʹe·lech went on to say to Abraham: “What were your intentions when you did this thing?” 11 Abraham said: “It was because I said to myself, ‘Surely there is no fear of God in this place, and they will kill me because of my wife.’ 12 And besides, she really is my sister, the daughter of my father but not the daughter of my mother, and she became my wife. 13 So when God caused me to wander from the house of my father, I said to her: ‘Let this be how you show loyal love to me: Everywhere we go, say of me, “He is my brother.”’”14 A·bimʹe·lech then took sheep and cattle and male and female servants and gave them to Abraham, and he returned his wife Sarah to him. 15 A·bimʹe·lech also said: “Here my land is available to you. Dwell wherever you please.” 16 And to Sarah he said: “Here I give 1,000 pieces of silver to your brother. It is a sign of your innocence to all who are with you and before everybody, and you are cleared of reproach.” 17 And Abraham began to make supplication to the true God, and God healed A·bimʹe·lech and his wife and his slave girls, and they began having children; 18 for Jehovah had made all the women of the house of A·bimʹe·lech barren because of Sarah, Abraham’s wife.
21 Jehovah turned his attention to Sarah just as he had said, and Jehovah did for Sarah what he had promised. 2 So Sarah became pregnant and then bore a son to Abraham in his old age at the appointed time God had promised him. 3 Abraham named his newborn son, whom Sarah bore to him, Isaac. 4 And Abraham circumcised his son Isaac when he was eight days old, just as God had commanded him. 5 Abraham was 100 years old when his son Isaac was born to him. 6 Then Sarah said: “God has brought me laughter; everybody hearing of it will laugh with me.” 7 And she added: “Who would have said to Abraham, ‘Sarah will certainly nurse children’? Yet, I have given birth to a son for him in his old age.”8 Now the child grew and was weaned, and Abraham prepared a big feast on the day that Isaac was weaned. 9 But Sarah kept noticing that the son of Haʹgar the Egyptian, whom she had borne to Abraham, was mocking Isaac. 10 So she said to Abraham: “Drive out this slave girl and her son, for the son of this slave girl is not going to be an heir along with my son, with Isaac!” 11 But what she said about his son was very displeasing to Abraham. 12 Then God said to Abraham: “Do not be displeased by what Sarah is saying to you about the boy and about your slave girl. Listen to her, for what will be called your offspring will be through Isaac. 13 As for the son of the slave girl, I will also make a nation out of him, because he is your offspring.”14 So Abraham got up early in the morning and took bread and a skin bottle of water and gave it to Haʹgar. He set these on her shoulder and then sent her away along with the boy. So she departed and wandered about in the wilderness of Beʹer-sheʹba. 15 Finally the water in the skin bottle was used up, and she pushed the boy under one of the bushes. 16 Then she went on and sat down by herself, about the distance of a bowshot away, because she said: “I do not want to watch the boy die.” So she sat down at a distance and began to cry aloud and to weep.17 At that God heard the voice of the boy, and God’s angel called to Haʹgar from the heavens and said to her: “What is the matter with you, Haʹgar? Do not be afraid, for God has heard the voice of the boy there where he is. 18 Get up, lift the boy and take hold of him with your hand, for I will make him a great nation.” 19 Then God opened her eyes and she saw a well of water, and she went and filled the skin bottle with water and gave the boy a drink. 20 And God was with the boy as he grew up. He lived in the wilderness and became an archer. 21 He took up dwelling in the wilderness of Paʹran, and his mother took a wife for him from the land of Egypt.22 At that time A·bimʹe·lech together with Phiʹcol the chief of his army said to Abraham: “God is with you in everything you are doing. 23 So now swear to me here by God that you will not deal falsely with me and with my offspring and with my descendants, and that you will deal with me and with the land where you have been residing with the same loyal love that I have shown you.” 24 So Abraham said: “I swear to this.”25 However, Abraham complained to A·bimʹe·lech about the well of water that the servants of A·bimʹe·lech had violently seized. 26 A·bimʹe·lech replied: “I do not know who did this; you did not tell me about it, and I heard nothing about it until today.” 27 At that Abraham took sheep and cattle and gave them to A·bimʹe·lech, and the two of them made a covenant. 28 When Abraham set seven female lambs apart from the flock by themselves, 29 A·bimʹe·lech said to Abraham: “Why have you set these seven female lambs here by themselves?” 30 Then he said: “You are to accept the seven female lambs from my hand as a witness that I dug this well.” 31 That is why he called that place Beʹer-sheʹba, because there both of them had taken an oath. 32 So they made a covenant at Beʹer-sheʹba, after which A·bimʹe·lech got up together with Phiʹcol the chief of his army, and they returned to the land of the Phi·lisʹtines. 33 After that he planted a tamarisk tree at Beʹer-sheʹba, and there he called on the name of Jehovah, the everlasting God. 34 And Abraham stayed in the land of the Phi·lisʹtines for a long time.
22 Now after this the true God put Abraham to the test, and he said to him: “Abraham!” to which he replied: “Here I am!” 2 Then he said: “Take, please, your son, your only son whom you so love, Isaac, and travel to the land of Mo·riʹah and offer him up there as a burnt offering on one of the mountains that I will designate to you.”3 So Abraham got up early in the morning and saddled his donkey and took two of his servants along with him and his son Isaac. He split the wood for the burnt offering, and then he rose and traveled to the place that the true God indicated to him. 4 On the third day, Abraham looked up and saw the place from a distance. 5 Abraham now said to his servants: “You stay here with the donkey, but the boy and I will go over there and worship and return to you.”6 So Abraham took the wood for the burnt offering and put it on his son Isaac. Then he took in his hands the fire and the knife, and the two of them walked on together. 7 Then Isaac said to his father Abraham: “My father!” He replied: “Yes, my son!” So he continued: “Here are the fire and the wood, but where is the sheep for the burnt offering?” 8 To this Abraham said: “God himself will provide the sheep for the burnt offering, my son.” And both of them walked on together.9 Finally they reached the place that the true God had indicated to him, and Abraham built an altar there and arranged the wood on it. He bound his son Isaac hand and foot and put him on the altar on top of the wood. 10 Then Abraham reached out his hand and took the knife to kill his son. 11 But Jehovah’s angel called to him from the heavens and said: “Abraham, Abraham!” to which he answered: “Here I am!” 12 Then he said: “Do not harm the boy, and do not do anything at all to him, for now I do know that you are God-fearing because you have not withheld your son, your only one, from me.” 13 At that Abraham looked up, and there just beyond him was a ram caught by its horns in a thicket. So Abraham went and took the ram and offered it up as a burnt offering in place of his son. 14 And Abraham named that place Je·hoʹvah-jiʹreh. This is why it is still said today: “In the mountain of Jehovah it will be provided.”15 And Jehovah’s angel called to Abraham a second time from the heavens, 16 saying: “‘By myself I swear,’ declares Jehovah, ‘that because you have done this and you have not withheld your son, your only one, 17 I will surely bless you and I will surely multiply your offspring like the stars of the heavens and like the grains of sand on the seashore, and your offspring will take possession of the gate of his enemies. 18 And by means of your offspring all nations of the earth will obtain a blessing for themselves because you have listened to my voice.’”19 After that Abraham returned to his servants, and they got up and went back together to Beʹer-sheʹba; and Abraham continued to dwell at Beʹer-sheʹba.20 After this it was reported to Abraham: “Here Milʹcah has also borne sons to Naʹhor your brother: 21 Uz his firstborn, Buz his brother, Kem·uʹel the father of Aʹram, 22 Cheʹsed, Haʹzo, Pilʹdash, Jidʹlaph, and Be·thuʹel.” 23 Be·thuʹel became the father of Re·bekʹah. Milʹcah bore these eight to Naʹhor the brother of Abraham. 24 His concubine, whose name was Reuʹmah, also bore sons: Teʹbah, Gaʹham, Taʹhash, and Maʹa·cah.
23 And Sarah lived for 127 years; these were the years of Sarah’s life. 2 So Sarah died in Kirʹi·ath-arʹba, that is, Hebʹron, in the land of Caʹnaan, and Abraham began to mourn and to weep over Sarah. 3 Then Abraham got up from before his dead wife and he said to the sons of Heth: 4 “I am a foreigner and settler among you. Give me a property to serve as a burial place in your midst so that I may remove my dead for burial.” 5 At this the sons of Heth answered Abraham: 6 “Hear us, my lord. You are a chieftain of God among us. You may bury your dead in the choicest of our burial places. None of us will hold back his burial place from you to prevent you from burying your dead.”7 So Abraham got up and bowed down to the people of the land, to the sons of Heth, 8 and said to them: “If you agree to let me remove my dead for burial, then listen to me and urge Eʹphron the son of Zoʹhar 9 to sell me the cave of Mach·peʹlah, which belongs to him; it is at the edge of his field. Let him sell it to me in your presence for the full amount of silver so that I may have a property for a burial place.”10 Now Eʹphron was sitting among the sons of Heth. So Eʹphron the Hitʹtite answered Abraham in the hearing of the sons of Heth, and before all who entered the gate of his city, saying: 11 “No, my lord! Listen to me. I give you both the field and the cave that is in it. In the presence of the sons of my people, I give it to you. Bury your dead.” 12 At that Abraham bowed down before the people of the land 13 and spoke to Eʹphron in the hearing of the people, saying: “Listen to me, if you will! I will give you the full amount of silver for the field. Take it from me, in order that I may bury my dead there.”14 Then Eʹphron answered Abraham: 15 “My lord, listen to me. This land is worth 400 silver shekels, but what is that between me and you? So bury your dead.” 16 Abraham listened to Eʹphron, and Abraham weighed out to Eʹphron the amount of silver that he had mentioned in the hearing of the sons of Heth, 400 silver shekels according to the weight accepted by the merchants. 17 Thus the field of Eʹphron in Mach·peʹlah, which was in front of Mamʹre—the field and the cave in it and all the trees within the boundaries of the field—became confirmed as 18 Abraham’s purchased property in the presence of the sons of Heth, before all those entering the gate of his city. 19 After that Abraham buried his wife Sarah in the cave of the field of Mach·peʹlah in front of Mamʹre, that is, Hebʹron, in the land of Caʹnaan. 20 Thus the field and the cave that was in it were transferred by the sons of Heth to Abraham as property for a burial place.
24 Abraham was now old, advanced in years, and Jehovah had blessed Abraham in everything. 2 Abraham said to his servant, the oldest one of his household, who was managing all he had: “Please put your hand under my thigh, 3 and I will make you swear by Jehovah, the God of the heavens and the God of the earth, that you will not take a wife for my son from the daughters of the Caʹnaan·ites, among whom I am dwelling. 4 You must go instead to my country and to my relatives and take a wife for my son, for Isaac.”5 However, the servant said to him: “What if the woman is not willing to come with me to this land? Must I then return your son to the land from which you came?” 6 At this Abraham said to him: “See that you do not take my son there. 7 Jehovah the God of the heavens, who took me from my father’s house and from the land of my relatives and who spoke with me and swore to me: ‘To your offspring I am going to give this land,’ he will send his angel ahead of you, and you will certainly take a wife for my son from there. 8 But if the woman is unwilling to come with you, you will be free from this oath. But you must not take my son there.” 9 With that the servant put his hand under the thigh of Abraham his master and swore to him concerning this matter.10 So the servant took ten of his master’s camels and departed, taking along all sorts of good things from his master. Then he went on his way to Mes·o·po·taʹmi·a, to the city of Naʹhor. 11 He had the camels kneel down at a well of water outside the city. It was about evening, the time when the women would go out to draw water. 12 Then he said: “Jehovah the God of my master Abraham, please grant me success this day, and show your loyal love to my master Abraham. 13 Here I am standing at a spring of water, and the daughters of the men of the city are coming out to draw water. 14 May it happen that the young woman to whom I say, ‘Please let down your water jar so that I may take a drink,’ and who replies, ‘Take a drink, and I will also water your camels,’ let this be the one you choose for your servant Isaac; and by this let me know that you have shown your loyal love to my master.”15 Even before he finished speaking, Re·bekʹah, who was the daughter of Be·thuʹel the son of Milʹcah the wife of Naʹhor, Abraham’s brother, came out with her water jar on her shoulder. 16 Now the young woman was very beautiful, a virgin; no man had had sexual relations with her. She went down to the spring, filled her water jar, and then came back up. 17 At once the servant ran to meet her and said: “Please give me a little sip of water from your jar.” 18 In turn she said: “Drink, my lord.” With that she quickly lowered her jar upon her hand and gave him a drink. 19 When she finished giving him a drink, she said: “I will also draw water for your camels until they are done drinking.” 20 So she quickly emptied her jar into the drinking trough and ran again and again to the well to draw water, and she kept drawing water for all his camels. 21 The whole time the man silently stared at her in amazement, wondering whether Jehovah had made his trip successful or not.22 When the camels had finished drinking, the man took out for her a gold nose ring weighing a half shekel and two bracelets of gold weighing ten shekels, 23 and he said: “Please tell me, whose daughter are you? Is there any room at your father’s house for us to spend the night?” 24 At that she said to him: “I am the daughter of Be·thuʹel the son of Milʹcah, whom she bore to Naʹhor.” 25 And she added: “We have both straw and much fodder and also a place to spend the night.” 26 Then the man bowed down and prostrated himself before Jehovah 27 and said: “May Jehovah be praised, the God of my master Abraham, for he has not abandoned his loyal love and his faithfulness toward my master. Jehovah has guided me to the house of the brothers of my master.”28 And the young woman ran to tell her mother’s household about these things. 29 Now Re·bekʹah had a brother whose name was Laʹban. So Laʹban ran to the man who was outside at the spring. 30 When he saw the nose ring and the bracelets on the hands of his sister and heard the words of his sister Re·bekʹah, who was saying, “This is the way the man spoke to me,” he came to meet the man, who was still there standing by the camels at the spring. 31 At once he said: “Come, you who are blessed by Jehovah. Why do you keep standing out here? I have made the house ready and a place for the camels.” 32 With that the man came into the house, and he unharnessed the camels and gave straw and fodder to the camels and water to wash his feet and the feet of the men who were with him. 33 However, when something to eat was set before him, he said: “I will not eat until I have told you what I have to say.” So Laʹban said: “Speak!”34 Then he said: “I am Abraham’s servant. 35 And Jehovah has blessed my master very much, and he has made him very wealthy by giving him sheep and cattle, silver and gold, male and female servants, and camels and donkeys. 36 Further, Sarah the wife of my master bore a son to my master after she grew old, and he will give him everything he has. 37 So my master made me swear, saying: ‘You must not take a wife for my son from the daughters of the Caʹnaan·ites, in whose land I am dwelling. 38 No, but you will go to the house of my father and to my family, and you must take a wife for my son.’ 39 But I said to my master: ‘What if the woman is unwilling to come with me?’ 40 He said to me: ‘Jehovah, before whom I have walked, will send his angel with you and will certainly give success to your journey, and you must take a wife for my son from my family and from the house of my father. 41 You will be released from your oath to me if you go to my family and they will not give her to you. This will release you from your oath.’42 “When I got to the spring today, I said: ‘Jehovah the God of my master Abraham, if you will make my journey successful, 43 here I am standing at a spring. What must take place is that when a young woman comes out to draw water, I will say, “Please, let me drink a little water from your jar,” 44 and she will say to me, “You take a drink, and I will also draw water for your camels.” Let that woman be the one whom Jehovah has chosen for the son of my master.’45 “Before I was finished speaking in my heart, there was Re·bekʹah coming out with her jar on her shoulder, and she made her way down to the spring and began to draw water. Then I said to her: ‘Give me a drink, please.’ 46 So she quickly lowered her jar from her shoulder and said: ‘Take a drink, and I will also water your camels.’ Then I took a drink, and she also watered the camels. 47 After that I asked her, ‘Whose daughter are you?’ to which she replied, ‘The daughter of Be·thuʹel the son of Naʹhor, whom Milʹcah bore to him.’ So I put the ring on her nose and the bracelets on her hands. 48 And I bowed down and prostrated myself before Jehovah and praised Jehovah the God of my master Abraham, who had led me on the right path to take the daughter of the brother of my master for his son. 49 And now tell me if you wish to show loyal love and faithfulness toward my master; but if not, tell me, so that I may proceed one way or the other.”50 Then Laʹban and Be·thuʹel answered: “This is from Jehovah. We are not able to say yes or no to you. 51 Here is Re·bekʹah before you. Take her and go, and let her become a wife to the son of your master, just as Jehovah has spoken.” 52 When Abraham’s servant heard their words, he at once bowed down on the ground before Jehovah. 53 And the servant began to bring out articles of silver and of gold and garments and to give them to Re·bekʹah, and he gave valuable things to her brother and to her mother. 54 After that he and the men with him ate and drank, and they spent the night there.When he got up in the morning, he said: “Send me off to my master.” 55 To this her brother and her mother said: “Let the young woman stay with us at least ten days. Then she can go.” 56 But he said to them: “Do not detain me, seeing that Jehovah has made my journey successful. Send me off, in order that I may go to my master.” 57 So they said: “Let us call the young woman and inquire of her.” 58 They called Re·bekʹah and said to her: “Will you go with this man?” She replied: “I am willing to go.”59 So they sent off their sister Re·bekʹah and her nurse and Abraham’s servant and his men. 60 And they blessed Re·bekʹah and said to her: “Our sister, may you become thousands times ten thousand, and let your offspring take possession of the gate of those who hate them.” 61 Then Re·bekʹah and her female attendants rose, got on the camels, and followed the man. So the servant took Re·bekʹah and went on his way.62 Now Isaac had come from the direction of Beʹer-laʹhai-roi, for he was dwelling in the land of the Negʹeb. 63 And Isaac was out walking in the field about nightfall to meditate. When he looked up, why, he saw that camels were coming! 64 When Re·bekʹah looked up, she caught sight of Isaac, and she quickly got down from the camel. 65 Then she asked the servant: “Who is that man there walking in the field to meet us?” And the servant said: “It is my master.” So she took her veil to cover herself. 66 And the servant told Isaac all the things he had done. 67 After that Isaac brought her into the tent of Sarah his mother. Thus he took Re·bekʹah as his wife; and he fell in love with her, and Isaac found comfort after the loss of his mother.
25 Now Abraham again took a wife, and her name was Ke·tuʹrah. 2 In time she bore him Zimʹran, Jokʹshan, Meʹdan, Midʹi·an, Ishʹbak, and Shuʹah.3 Jokʹshan became father to Sheʹba and Deʹdan.The sons of Deʹdan were As·shuʹrim, Le·tuʹshim, and Le·umʹmim.4 The sons of Midʹi·an were Eʹphah, Eʹpher, Haʹnoch, A·biʹda, and El·daʹah.All of these were the sons of Ke·tuʹrah.5 Later on Abraham gave everything he had to Isaac, 6 but Abraham gave gifts to his sons by his concubines. Then while he was still alive, he sent them eastward, away from Isaac his son, to the land of the East. 7 The years of Abraham’s life were 175 years. 8 Then Abraham breathed his last and died at a good old age, old and satisfied, and was gathered to his people. 9 His sons Isaac and Ishʹma·el buried him in the cave of Mach·peʹlah in the field of Eʹphron the son of Zoʹhar the Hitʹtite that is in front of Mamʹre, 10 the field that Abraham had purchased from the sons of Heth. There Abraham was buried, with his wife Sarah. 11 After Abraham’s death, God continued to bless his son Isaac, and Isaac was dwelling near Beʹer-laʹhai-roi.12 This is the history of Ishʹma·el the son of Abraham whom Haʹgar the Egyptian, the servant of Sarah, bore to Abraham.13 Now these are the names of the sons of Ishʹma·el, by their names according to their family origins: Ishʹma·el’s firstborn Ne·baʹioth, then Keʹdar, Adʹbe·el, Mibʹsam, 14 Mishʹma, Duʹmah, Masʹsa, 15 Haʹdad, Teʹma, Jeʹtur, Naʹphish, and Kedʹe·mah. 16 These are the sons of Ishʹma·el, and these are their names by their settlements and by their encampments, 12 chieftains according to their clans. 17 And Ishʹma·el lived for 137 years. Then he breathed his last and died and was gathered to his people. 18 And they took up dwelling from Havʹi·lah near Shur, which is close to Egypt, as far as As·syrʹi·a. He settled near all his brothers.19 And this is the history of Isaac the son of Abraham.Abraham became father to Isaac. 20 Isaac was 40 years old when he married Re·bekʹah, the daughter of Be·thuʹel the A·ra·maeʹan of Padʹdan-aʹram, the sister of Laʹban the A·ra·maeʹan. 21 And Isaac kept pleading with Jehovah regarding his wife, because she was barren; so Jehovah responded to his plea, and his wife Re·bekʹah became pregnant. 22 And the sons within her began to struggle with each other, so that she said: “If this is the way it is, why should I go on living?” So she inquired of Jehovah. 23 And Jehovah said to her: “Two nations are in your womb, and two peoples will be separated from within you; and the one nation will be stronger than the other nation, and the older will serve the younger.”24 When the time came for her to give birth, look! twins were in her womb. 25 Then the first came out red all over and was like a garment of hair, so they named him Eʹsau. 26 After that his brother came out and his hand was holding onto the heel of Eʹsau, so he named him Jacob. Isaac was 60 years old when she gave birth to them.27 As the boys got bigger, Eʹsau became a skilled hunter, a man of the field, but Jacob was a blameless man, dwelling in tents. 28 And Isaac loved Eʹsau because it meant game in his mouth, whereas Re·bekʹah loved Jacob. 29 On one occasion Jacob was boiling some stew when Eʹsau returned from the field exhausted. 30 So Eʹsau said to Jacob: “Quick, please, give me some of the red stew that you have there, for I am exhausted!” That is why his name was Eʹdom. 31 To this Jacob said: “First sell me your right as firstborn!” 32 And Eʹsau continued: “Here I am about to die! What use is a birthright to me?” 33 And Jacob added: “Swear to me first!” So he swore to him and sold his right as firstborn to Jacob. 34 Then Jacob gave Eʹsau bread and lentil stew, and he ate and drank, and he got up and went away. Thus Eʹsau despised the birthright.
26 Now there was a famine in the land, in addition to the first famine that occurred in the days of Abraham, so that Isaac went to A·bimʹe·lech king of the Phi·lisʹtines, in Geʹrar. 2 Then Jehovah appeared to him and said: “Do not go down to Egypt. Dwell in the land that I designate to you. 3 Reside as a foreigner in this land, and I will continue with you and bless you because to you and to your offspring I will give all these lands, and I will carry out the oath that I swore to your father Abraham: 4 ‘I will multiply your offspring like the stars of the heavens; and I will give to your offspring all these lands; and by means of your offspring, all nations of the earth will obtain a blessing for themselves,’ 5 on account of the fact that Abraham listened to my voice and continued to keep my requirements, my commands, my statutes, and my laws.” 6 So Isaac continued to dwell in Geʹrar.7 When the men of the place kept asking about his wife, he would say: “She is my sister.” He was afraid to say, “She is my wife,” for he said, “The men of the place might kill me because of Re·bekʹah,” for she was beautiful in appearance. 8 After some time had passed, A·bimʹe·lech king of the Phi·lisʹtines was looking out of the window, and he saw Isaac displaying affection for Re·bekʹah his wife. 9 At once A·bimʹe·lech called Isaac and said: “She is actually your wife! Why did you say, ‘She is my sister’?” At this Isaac said to him: “I said it for fear I should die because of her.” 10 But A·bimʹe·lech continued: “What have you done to us? One of the people could easily have lain down with your wife, and you would have brought guilt upon us!” 11 Then A·bimʹe·lech commanded all the people, saying: “Anybody touching this man and his wife will surely be put to death!”12 And Isaac began to sow seed in that land, and in that year he reaped 100 times what he sowed, for Jehovah was blessing him. 13 The man became wealthy, and he continued to prosper until he became very wealthy. 14 He acquired flocks of sheep and herds of cattle and a large body of servants, and the Phi·lisʹtines began to envy him.15 So the Phi·lisʹtines took soil and stopped up all the wells that his father’s servants had dug in the days of Abraham. 16 A·bimʹe·lech then said to Isaac: “Move from our neighborhood, for you have grown far stronger than we are.” 17 So Isaac moved from there and encamped in the valley of Geʹrar and began dwelling there. 18 And Isaac again dug the wells that had been dug in the days of his father Abraham but that the Phi·lisʹtines had stopped up after Abraham’s death, and he called them by the names that his father had given them.19 When the servants of Isaac were digging in the valley, they found a well of fresh water. 20 And the shepherds of Geʹrar began quarreling with the shepherds of Isaac, saying: “The water is ours!” So he named the well Eʹsek, because they had quarreled with him. 21 And they started digging another well, and they began quarreling over it also. So he named it Sitʹnah. 22 Later he moved away from there and dug another well, but they did not quarrel over it. So he named it Re·hoʹboth and said: “It is because now Jehovah has given us ample room and has made us fruitful in the land.”23 Then he went up from there to Beʹer-sheʹba. 24 That night Jehovah appeared to him and said: “I am the God of your father Abraham. Do not be afraid, for I am with you, and I will bless you and multiply your offspring on account of Abraham my servant.” 25 So he built an altar there and called on the name of Jehovah. And Isaac pitched his tent there, and his servants dug a well there.26 Later A·bimʹe·lech came to him from Geʹrar with A·huzʹzath his personal adviser and Phiʹcol the chief of his army. 27 At this Isaac said to them: “Why have you come to me, seeing that you hated me and sent me away from your neighborhood?” 28 To this they said: “We have clearly seen that Jehovah has been with you. So we said, ‘Let there, please, be an oath of obligation between us and you, and let us make a covenant with you 29 that you will do nothing bad to us just as we have not harmed you, seeing that we have done only good to you in that we sent you away in peace. You now are the blessed of Jehovah.’” 30 Then he made a feast for them, and they ate and drank. 31 In the morning they got up early and swore an oath to each other. After that Isaac sent them away, and they went from him in peace.32 On that day the servants of Isaac came and reported to him about the well that they had dug, and they told him: “We have found water!” 33 So he named it Shiʹbah. That is why the name of the city is Beʹer-sheʹba to this day.34 When Eʹsau was 40 years old, he took as wife Juʹdith the daughter of Be·eʹri the Hitʹtite and also Basʹe·math the daughter of Eʹlon the Hitʹtite. 35 They were a source of great grief to Isaac and Re·bekʹah.
27 Now when Isaac was old and his eyes were too weak to see, he called Eʹsau his older son to him and said: “My son!” He replied: “Here I am!” 2 And he went on to say: “I have now grown old. I do not know the day of my death. 3 So at this time take, please, your weapons, your quiver and your bow, and go out to the field and hunt some wild game for me. 4 Then make the kind of tasty dish that I am fond of and bring it to me. Then I will eat it so that I may bless you before I die.”5 However, Re·bekʹah was listening while Isaac spoke to Eʹsau his son. And Eʹsau went out into the field to hunt game and to bring it in. 6 And Re·bekʹah said to Jacob her son: “I just heard your father speaking to your brother Eʹsau, saying, 7 ‘Bring me some game and make me a tasty dish. Then let me eat so that I may bless you before Jehovah before my death.’ 8 And now, my son, listen carefully and do what I am instructing you. 9 Go, please, to the herd and get me two of the best young goats from there so that I may prepare from them a tasty dish for your father, just the way he likes it. 10 Then take it to your father to eat, in order that he may bless you before his death.”11 Jacob said to his mother Re·bekʹah: “But Eʹsau my brother is a hairy man, and my skin is smooth. 12 What if my father feels me? Then I will certainly appear to be mocking him, and I will bring upon myself a curse rather than a blessing.” 13 At this his mother said to him: “Upon me be the curse meant for you, my son. Just do as I say and go, get them for me.” 14 So he went and got them and brought them to his mother, and his mother made a tasty dish, just the way his father liked it. 15 After that Re·bekʹah took her older son Eʹsau’s finest garments, which she had in the house, and put them on her younger son Jacob. 16 She also put the skins of the young goats on his hands and on the hairless part of his neck. 17 Then she handed the tasty dish and the bread that she had made to her son Jacob.18 So he went in to his father and said: “My father!” to which he said: “Here I am! Who are you, my son?” 19 Jacob said to his father: “I am Eʹsau your firstborn. I have done just as you told me. Sit up, please, and eat some of my game, so that you may bless me.” 20 At that Isaac said to his son: “How were you so quick in finding it, my son?” He replied: “Because Jehovah your God brought it to me.” 21 Then Isaac said to Jacob: “Come near, please, that I may feel you, my son, to know whether you are really my son Eʹsau or not.” 22 So Jacob came near to his father Isaac, and he felt him, after which he said: “The voice is the voice of Jacob, but the hands are the hands of Eʹsau.” 23 He did not recognize him because his hands were hairy like the hands of his brother Eʹsau. So he blessed him.24 After that he asked: “Are you really my son Eʹsau?” to which he replied: “I am.” 25 Then he said: “Bring me some of the wild game for me to eat, my son, then I will bless you.” With that he brought it to him and he ate, and he brought him wine and he drank. 26 Then Isaac his father said to him: “Come near, please, and kiss me, my son.” 27 So he came near and kissed him, and he could smell the scent of his garments. Then he blessed him and said:“See, the scent of my son is like the scent of the field that Jehovah has blessed. 28 May the true God give you the dews of the heavens and the fertile soils of the earth and an abundance of grain and new wine. 29 Let peoples serve you, and let nations bow low to you. Be master over your brothers, and let the sons of your mother bow low to you. Cursed be everyone who curses you, and blessed be everyone who blesses you.”30 Now Isaac had just finished blessing Jacob, and Jacob had barely left the presence of his father Isaac when his brother Eʹsau came back from his hunting. 31 He too prepared a tasty dish and brought it to his father, and he said to his father: “Let my father get up and eat some of his son’s game, in order that you may bless me.” 32 At this his father Isaac said to him: “Who are you?” to which he said: “I am your son, your firstborn, Eʹsau.” 33 And Isaac began to tremble violently, so he said: “Who was it, then, who hunted for game and brought it to me? I already ate it before you arrived, and I blessed him—and he will surely be blessed!”34 On hearing his father’s words, Eʹsau began to cry out in an extremely loud and bitter manner and to say to his father: “Bless me, yes, me too, my father!” 35 But he said: “Your brother came deceitfully so that he might get the blessing meant for you.” 36 At this he said: “Is he not rightly named Jacob, that he might supplant me these two times? My birthright he has already taken, and now he has taken my blessing!” Then he added: “Have you not reserved a blessing for me?” 37 But Isaac answered Eʹsau: “Here I have appointed him master over you, and I have given him all his brothers as servants, and I have bestowed grain and new wine for his support. What is left that I can do for you, my son?”38 Eʹsau said to his father: “Is there just one blessing that you have, my father? Bless me, yes, me too, my father!” With that Eʹsau cried loudly and burst into tears. 39 So his father Isaac answered him:“See, away from the fertile soils of the earth your dwelling will be, and away from the dew of the heavens above. 40 And by your sword you will live, and you will serve your brother. But when you grow restless, you will indeed break his yoke off your neck.”41 However, Eʹsau harbored animosity against Jacob because of the blessing his father had given him, and Eʹsau kept saying in his heart: “The days of mourning for my father are getting closer. After that I am going to kill Jacob my brother.” 42 When the words of her older son Eʹsau were told to Re·bekʹah, she at once sent for her younger son Jacob and said to him: “Look! Your brother Eʹsau is planning to take revenge by killing you. 43 Now, my son, do as I say. Get up and run away to my brother Laʹban at Haʹran. 44 Dwell with him for a while until your brother’s rage calms down, 45 until your brother’s anger toward you subsides and he forgets what you have done to him. Then I will send for you from there. Why should I lose both of you in one day?”46 After that Re·bekʹah kept saying to Isaac: “I am disgusted with my life because of the daughters of Heth. If Jacob ever takes a wife from the daughters of Heth, like these daughters of the land, what good is my life?”
28 So Isaac called Jacob and blessed him and commanded him, saying: “You must not take a wife from the daughters of Caʹnaan. 2 Go away to Padʹdan-aʹram to the house of Be·thuʹel, your mother’s father, and from there take for yourself a wife from the daughters of Laʹban, your mother’s brother. 3 God Almighty will bless you and make you fruitful and multiply you, and you will certainly become a congregation of peoples. 4 And he will give to you the blessing of Abraham, to you and to your offspring with you, so that you may take possession of the land where you have been living as a foreigner, which God has given to Abraham.”5 So Isaac sent Jacob away, and he departed for Padʹdan-aʹram, to Laʹban the son of Be·thuʹel the A·ra·maeʹan, the brother of Re·bekʹah, the mother of Jacob and Eʹsau.6 Eʹsau saw that Isaac had blessed Jacob and had sent him away to Padʹdan-aʹram to take a wife from there and that when he blessed him, he commanded him, “Do not take a wife from the daughters of Caʹnaan,” 7 and that Jacob obeyed his father and his mother and departed for Padʹdan-aʹram. 8 Eʹsau then realized that the daughters of Caʹnaan were displeasing to his father Isaac, 9 so Eʹsau went to Ishʹma·el and took as wife Maʹha·lath the daughter of Abraham’s son Ishʹma·el, the sister of Ne·baʹioth, in addition to the other wives he already had.10 Jacob departed from Beʹer-sheʹba and kept going toward Haʹran. 11 In time he came to a place and prepared to spend the night there because the sun had set. So he took one of the stones of that place and set it to rest his head on and lay down there. 12 Then he had a dream, and look! there was a stairway set on the earth, and its top reached up to the heavens; and there were God’s angels ascending and descending on it. 13 And look! there was Jehovah stationed above it, and he said:“I am Jehovah the God of Abraham your father and the God of Isaac. The land on which you are lying, to you I am going to give it and to your offspring. 14 And your offspring will certainly become like the dust particles of the earth, and you will spread abroad to the west and to the east and to the north and to the south, and by means of you and by means of your offspring all the families of the ground will certainly be blessed. 15 I am with you, and I will safeguard you wherever you go, and I will return you to this land. I will not leave you until I have done what I have promised you.”16 Then Jacob awoke from his sleep and said: “Truly Jehovah is in this place, and I did not know it.” 17 And he grew fearful and added: “How awe-inspiring this place is! This can only be the house of God, and this is the gate of the heavens.” 18 So Jacob got up early in the morning and took the stone on which he had rested his head and set it up as a pillar and poured oil on top of it. 19 So he named that place Bethʹel, but previously the city’s name was Luz.20 Jacob then made a vow, saying: “If God will continue with me and will protect me on my journey and will give me bread to eat and garments to wear 21 and I return in peace to the house of my father, then Jehovah will certainly have proved to be my God. 22 And this stone that I have set up as a pillar will become a house of God, and without fail I will give you a tenth of everything you give to me.”
29 After that Jacob resumed his journey and traveled on to the land of the people of the East. 2 Now he saw a well in the field and three droves of sheep lying down next to it, because they usually watered the droves from that well. There was a large stone over the mouth of the well. 3 When all the droves had been gathered there, they rolled away the stone from the mouth of the well, and they watered the flocks, after which they returned the stone to its place over the mouth of the well.4 So Jacob said to them: “My brothers, what place are you from?” to which they said: “We are from Haʹran.” 5 He said to them: “Do you know Laʹban the grandson of Naʹhor?” to which they said: “We know him.” 6 At this he said to them: “Is he well?” They replied: “He is well. And here is his daughter Rachel coming with the sheep!” 7 Then he said: “It is still the middle of the day. It is not the time for gathering the herds. Water the sheep, and then go feed them.” 8 To this they said: “We are not allowed to do so until all the droves are gathered and they roll the stone away from the mouth of the well. Then we water the sheep.”9 While he was yet speaking with them, Rachel came with her father’s sheep, for she was a shepherdess. 10 When Jacob saw Rachel, the daughter of Laʹban his mother’s brother, and the sheep of Laʹban, Jacob immediately approached and rolled the stone away from the mouth of the well and watered the sheep of Laʹban his mother’s brother. 11 Then Jacob kissed Rachel and raised his voice and burst into tears. 12 And Jacob began to tell Rachel that he was the relative of her father and that he was the son of Re·bekʹah. And she ran off and told her father.13 As soon as Laʹban heard the report about Jacob the son of his sister, he ran to meet him. He embraced him and kissed him and brought him into his house. And he began to tell Laʹban all these things. 14 Laʹban said to him: “You are indeed my bone and my flesh.” So he stayed with him a full month.15 Laʹban then said to Jacob: “Just because you are my relative, should you serve me for nothing? Tell me, what are your wages to be?” 16 Now Laʹban had two daughters. The name of the older was Leʹah, and the name of the younger, Rachel. 17 But the eyes of Leʹah had no luster, whereas Rachel had become a very attractive and beautiful woman. 18 Jacob had fallen in love with Rachel, so he said: “I am willing to serve you seven years for your younger daughter Rachel.” 19 To this Laʹban said: “It is better for me to give her to you than to give her to another man. Keep dwelling with me.” 20 And Jacob served seven years for Rachel, but in his eyes they were like just a few days because of his love for her.21 Then Jacob said to Laʹban: “Give over my wife because my days are up, and let me have relations with her.” 22 With that Laʹban gathered all the men of the place and made a feast. 23 But during the evening, he resorted to taking his daughter Leʹah and bringing her to him that he might have relations with her. 24 Laʹban also gave his female servant Zilʹpah to his daughter Leʹah as a servant. 25 In the morning Jacob saw that it was Leʹah! So he said to Laʹban: “What have you done to me? Was it not for Rachel that I served you? Why have you tricked me?” 26 To this Laʹban said: “It is not our custom here to give the younger woman before the firstborn. 27 Celebrate the week of this woman. After that you will also be given this other woman in exchange for serving me seven more years.” 28 Jacob did so and celebrated the week of this woman, after which he gave him his daughter Rachel as a wife. 29 Besides, Laʹban gave his female servant Bilʹhah to his daughter Rachel as her servant.30 Then Jacob had relations also with Rachel, and he loved Rachel more than Leʹah, and he served him for another seven years. 31 When Jehovah saw that Leʹah was unloved, he then enabled her to become pregnant, but Rachel was barren. 32 So Leʹah became pregnant and gave birth to a son and named him Reuʹben, for she said: “It is because Jehovah has looked upon my affliction, for now my husband will begin to love me.” 33 And she again became pregnant and gave birth to a son and then said: “It is because Jehovah has listened, in that I was unloved, so he gave me this one also.” Then she named him Simʹe·on. 34 And she became pregnant yet again and gave birth to a son and then said: “Now this time my husband will join himself to me, because I have borne him three sons.” Therefore, he was named Leʹvi. 35 And she became pregnant once more and gave birth to a son and then said: “This time I will praise Jehovah.” She therefore named him Judah. After that she stopped giving birth.
3 Now the serpent was the most cautious of all the wild animals of the field that Jehovah God had made. So it said to the woman: “Did God really say that you must not eat from every tree of the garden?” 2 At this the woman said to the serpent: “We may eat of the fruit of the trees of the garden. 3 But God has said about the fruit of the tree that is in the middle of the garden: ‘You must not eat from it, no, you must not touch it; otherwise you will die.’” 4 At this the serpent said to the woman: “You certainly will not die. 5 For God knows that in the very day you eat from it, your eyes will be opened and you will be like God, knowing good and bad.”6 Consequently, the woman saw that the tree was good for food and that it was something desirable to the eyes, yes, the tree was pleasing to look at. So she began taking of its fruit and eating it. Afterward, she also gave some to her husband when he was with her, and he began eating it. 7 Then the eyes of both of them were opened, and they realized that they were naked. So they sewed fig leaves together and made loin coverings for themselves.8 Later they heard the voice of Jehovah God as he was walking in the garden about the breezy part of the day, and the man and his wife hid from the face of Jehovah God among the trees of the garden. 9 And Jehovah God kept calling to the man and saying to him: “Where are you?” 10 Finally he said: “I heard your voice in the garden, but I was afraid because I was naked, so I hid myself.” 11 At that he said: “Who told you that you were naked? Have you eaten from the tree from which I commanded you not to eat?” 12 The man said: “The woman whom you gave to be with me, she gave me fruit from the tree, so I ate.” 13 Jehovah God then said to the woman: “What is this you have done?” The woman replied: “The serpent deceived me, so I ate.”14 Then Jehovah God said to the serpent: “Because you have done this, you are the cursed one out of all the domestic animals and out of all the wild animals of the field. On your belly you will go, and you will eat dust all the days of your life. 15 And I will put enmity between you and the woman and between your offspring and her offspring. He will crush your head, and you will strike him in the heel.”16 To the woman he said: “I will greatly increase the pain of your pregnancy; in pain you will give birth to children, and your longing will be for your husband, and he will dominate you.”17 And to Adam he said: “Because you listened to your wife’s voice and ate from the tree concerning which I gave you this command, ‘You must not eat from it,’ cursed is the ground on your account. In pain you will eat its produce all the days of your life. 18 It will grow thorns and thistles for you, and you must eat the vegetation of the field. 19 In the sweat of your face you will eat bread until you return to the ground, for out of it you were taken. For dust you are and to dust you will return.”20 After this Adam named his wife Eve, because she was to become the mother of everyone living. 21 And Jehovah God made long garments from skins for Adam and for his wife, to clothe them. 22 Jehovah God then said: “Here the man has become like one of us in knowing good and bad. Now in order that he may not put his hand out and take fruit also from the tree of life and eat and live forever,—” 23 With that Jehovah God expelled him from the garden of Eʹden to cultivate the ground from which he had been taken. 24 So he drove the man out, and he posted at the east of the garden of Eʹden the cherubs and the flaming blade of a sword that was turning continuously to guard the way to the tree of life.
30 When Rachel saw that she had borne no children to Jacob, she became jealous of her sister and began to say to Jacob: “Give me children or else I will die.” 2 At this Jacob’s anger flared up against Rachel, and he said: “Am I in the place of God, who has prevented you from having children?” 3 So she said: “Here is my slave girl Bilʹhah. Have relations with her in order that she may bear children for me and that through her, I too may have children.” 4 With that she gave him her servant Bilʹhah as a wife, and Jacob had relations with her. 5 Bilʹhah became pregnant and in time bore Jacob a son. 6 Then Rachel said: “God has acted as my judge and has also listened to my voice, so that he gave me a son.” That is why she named him Dan. 7 Bilʹhah, Rachel’s servant, became pregnant once more and in time bore Jacob a second son. 8 Then Rachel said: “With strenuous wrestlings I have wrestled with my sister. I have also come off the winner!” So she named him Naphʹta·li.9 When Leʹah saw that she had stopped having children, she took her servant Zilʹpah and gave her to Jacob as a wife. 10 And Leʹah’s servant Zilʹpah bore a son to Jacob. 11 Then Leʹah said: “With good fortune!” So she named him Gad. 12 After that Zilʹpah, Leʹah’s servant, bore a second son to Jacob. 13 Then Leʹah said: “With my happiness! For the daughters will certainly pronounce me happy.” So she named him Ashʹer.14 Now Reuʹben was walking in the days of the wheat harvest, and he found mandrakes in the field. So he brought them to his mother Leʹah. Then Rachel said to Leʹah: “Give me, please, some of your son’s mandrakes.” 15 At this she said to her: “Is it a small matter that you took my husband? Would you now take my son’s mandrakes also?” So Rachel said: “Very well. He will lie down with you tonight in exchange for your son’s mandrakes.”16 When Jacob was coming from the field in the evening, Leʹah went out to meet him and said: “It is with me you are going to have relations, because I have hired you outright with my son’s mandrakes.” So he lay down with her that night. 17 And God heard and answered Leʹah, and she became pregnant and in time bore to Jacob a fifth son. 18 Then Leʹah said: “God has given me my wages because I have given my servant to my husband.” So she named him Isʹsa·char. 19 And Leʹah became pregnant once more and in time bore a sixth son to Jacob. 20 Then Leʹah said: “God has endowed me, yes, me, with a good endowment. At last, my husband will tolerate me, for I have borne him six sons.” So she named him Zebʹu·lun. 21 Afterward she bore a daughter and named her Diʹnah.22 Finally God remembered Rachel, and God heard and answered her by enabling her to become pregnant. 23 And she became pregnant and gave birth to a son. Then she said: “God has taken away my reproach!” 24 So she named him Joseph, saying: “Jehovah is adding another son to me.”25 After Rachel had given birth to Joseph, Jacob immediately said to Laʹban: “Send me away so that I may go to my place and to my land. 26 Give over my wives and my children, for whom I have served with you, that I may go, for you well know how I have served you.” 27 Then Laʹban said to him: “If I have found favor in your eyes,—I have understood by the omens that Jehovah is blessing me because of you.” 28 And he added: “Stipulate your wages to me, and I will give them.” 29 So Jacob said to him: “You know how I have served you and how your herd has fared with me; 30 you had little before my coming, but your herd has increased and multiplied, and Jehovah has blessed you since I arrived. So when will I do something for my own house?”31 Then he said: “What should I give you?” And Jacob said: “You will give me nothing whatsoever! If you will do this one thing for me, I will resume shepherding your flock and guarding it. 32 I will pass through your whole flock today. You set aside from there every sheep speckled and with color patches and every dark-brown sheep among the young rams and any color-patched and speckled one among the she-goats. From now on, these must become my wages. 33 And my righteousness must speak for me on a future day when you come to look over my wages; every one that is not speckled and color-patched among the she-goats and dark brown among the young rams will be considered stolen if it is with me.”34 To this Laʹban said: “That is fine! Let it be according to your word.” 35 Then on that day, he set aside the he-goats striped and color-patched and all the she-goats speckled and color-patched, every one in which there was any white and every one dark brown among the young rams, and gave them into the care of his sons. 36 After that he set a distance of three days’ journey between himself and Jacob, and Jacob was shepherding the flocks of Laʹban that remained over.37 Jacob then took freshly cut staffs of the storax, almond, and plane trees, and he peeled white spots in them by exposing the white wood of the staffs. 38 Then he placed the staffs that he had peeled in front of the flock, in the gutters, in the drinking troughs, where the flocks would come to drink, that they might get into heat in front of them when they came to drink.39 So the flocks would get into heat in front of the staffs, and the flocks would produce striped, speckled, and color-patched offspring. 40 Then Jacob separated the young rams and turned the flocks to face the striped ones and all the dark-brown ones among the flocks of Laʹban. Then he separated his own flocks and did not mix them with Laʹban’s flocks. 41 And whenever the robust animals would get into heat, Jacob would place the staffs in the gutters before the eyes of the flocks, that they might get into heat by the staffs. 42 But when the animals were weak, he would not place the staffs there. So the weak ones always came to be Laʹban’s, but the robust ones became Jacob’s.43 And the man grew very prosperous, and he acquired great flocks and male and female servants and camels and donkeys.
31 In time he heard what the sons of Laʹban were saying: “Jacob has taken everything that belonged to our father, and from what belonged to our father, he has amassed all this wealth.” 2 When Jacob would look at the face of Laʹban, he saw that his attitude toward him was not what it used to be. 3 Finally Jehovah said to Jacob: “Return to the land of your fathers and to your relatives, and I will continue with you.” 4 Then Jacob sent a message to Rachel and Leʹah to come out to the field to his flock, 5 and he said to them:“I have seen that your father’s attitude toward me has changed, but the God of my father has been with me. 6 You yourselves certainly know that I have served your father with all my power. 7 And your father has tried to cheat me and has changed my wages ten times; but God has not allowed him to do me harm. 8 If on the one hand he would say, ‘The speckled ones will be your wages,’ then the whole flock produced speckled ones; but if on the other hand he would say, ‘The striped ones will be your wages,’ then the whole flock produced striped ones. 9 So God kept taking your father’s livestock away from him and giving it to me. 10 Once when the flock got into heat, I raised my eyes and saw in a dream that the he-goats mating with the flock were striped, speckled, and spotty. 11 Then the angel of the true God said to me in the dream, ‘Jacob!’ to which I said, ‘Here I am.’ 12 And he continued, ‘Raise your eyes, please, and see that all the he-goats mating with the flock are striped, speckled, and spotty, for I have seen all that Laʹban is doing to you. 13 I am the true God of Bethʹel, where you anointed a pillar and where you made a vow to me. Now get up, go out of this land, and return to the land of your birth.’”14 At this Rachel and Leʹah answered him: “Is there any share left for us to inherit in our father’s house? 15 Does he not consider us as foreigners, since he has sold us and has been using up the money given for us? 16 All the riches that God has taken away from our father are ours and our children’s. So, then, do everything that God has told you to do.”17 Then Jacob got up and lifted his children and his wives on the camels, 18 and he began driving all his herd and all the goods that he had accumulated, the livestock in his possession that he had accumulated in Padʹdan-aʹram, to go to Isaac his father in the land of Caʹnaan.19 Now Laʹban had gone to shear his sheep, and Rachel stole the teraphim statues that belonged to her father. 20 Moreover, Jacob outwitted Laʹban the A·ra·maeʹan, for he had not told him that he was running away. 21 And he ran away and crossed the River, he and all he had. Then he headed toward the mountainous region of Gilʹe·ad. 22 On the third day, Laʹban was told that Jacob had run away. 23 So he took his brothers with him and pursued him for a journey of seven days and caught up with him in the mountainous region of Gilʹe·ad. 24 Then God came to Laʹban the A·ra·maeʹan in a dream by night and said to him: “Be careful about what you say to Jacob, either good or bad.”25 So Laʹban approached Jacob, as Jacob had pitched his tent in the mountain and Laʹban had encamped with his brothers in the mountainous region of Gilʹe·ad. 26 Then Laʹban said to Jacob: “What have you done? Why have you resorted to outwitting me and carrying my daughters off like captives taken by the sword? 27 Why did you run away secretly and outwit me and not tell me? If you had told me, I could have sent you away with rejoicing and with songs, with tambourine and with harp. 28 But you did not give me a chance to kiss my grandchildren and my daughters. You have acted foolishly. 29 It is in my power to do harm to you, but the God of your father spoke to me last night, saying, ‘Be careful about what you say to Jacob, either good or bad.’ 30 Now you have gone because you have been longing to return to the house of your father, but why have you stolen my gods?”31 Jacob answered Laʹban: “It was because I was afraid, for I said to myself, ‘You might take your daughters away from me by force.’ 32 Anyone with whom you find your gods will not live. Before our brothers, examine what I have, and take what is yours.” But Jacob did not know that Rachel had stolen them. 33 So Laʹban went into the tent of Jacob and into the tent of Leʹah and into the tent of the two slave girls, but did not find them. Then he came out of Leʹah’s tent and went into Rachel’s tent. 34 Meanwhile, Rachel had taken the teraphim statues and put them in the woman’s saddle basket of the camel, and she was sitting on them. So Laʹban searched through the whole tent but did not find them. 35 Then she said to her father: “Do not be angry, my lord, because I am not able to get up before you, for the customary thing with women is upon me.” So he searched on carefully but did not find the teraphim statues.36 At that Jacob became angry and began to criticize Laʹban. Jacob then said to Laʹban: “What is my offense, and for what sin are you hotly pursuing me? 37 Now that you have searched through all my goods, what have you found that belongs to your house? Put it here in front of my brothers and your brothers, and let them decide between the two of us. 38 During these 20 years that I have been with you, your sheep and your goats never miscarried, and I never ate the rams of your flock. 39 I did not bring you any animal torn by wild beasts. I would stand the loss of it myself. Whether the animal was stolen by day or was stolen by night, you would demand compensation from me. 40 By day the heat consumed me, and the cold by night, and sleep would flee from my eyes. 41 This makes 20 years for me in your house. I have served you 14 years for your two daughters and 6 years for your flock, and you kept changing my wages ten times. 42 If the God of my father, the God of Abraham and the One whom Isaac fears, had not been on my side, you would now have sent me away empty-handed. God has seen my affliction and the toil of my hands, and that is why he reproved you last night.”43 Then Laʹban answered Jacob: “The daughters are my daughters and the children my children and the flock my flock, and everything you are looking at is mine and my daughters’. What can I do today against these or against their children whom they have borne? 44 Now come, let us make a covenant, you and I, and it will serve as a witness between us.” 45 So Jacob took a stone and set it up as a pillar. 46 Then Jacob said to his brothers: “Pick up stones!” And they took stones and made a pile. After that they ate there on the pile of stones. 47 And Laʹban began calling it Jeʹgar-sa·ha·duʹtha, but Jacob called it Galʹe·ed.48 Laʹban then said: “This pile of stones is a witness between me and you today.” That is why he named it Galʹe·ed, 49 and the Watchtower, for he said: “Let Jehovah keep watch between you and me when we are out of each other’s sight. 50 If you mistreat my daughters and if you start taking wives in addition to my daughters, though there is no man with us, remember that God will be a witness between you and me.” 51 Laʹban went on to say to Jacob: “Here is this pile of stones, and here is the pillar that I have erected between you and me. 52 This pile of stones is a witness, and the pillar is something that bears witness, that I will not pass beyond this pile of stones to bring harm to you and you will not pass beyond this pile of stones and this pillar to bring harm to me. 53 Let the God of Abraham and the God of Naʹhor, the God of their father, judge between us.” And Jacob swore by the One whom his father Isaac fears.54 After that Jacob offered a sacrifice in the mountain and invited his brothers to eat bread. So they ate and spent the night in the mountain. 55 However, Laʹban got up early in the morning and kissed his grandchildren and his daughters and blessed them. Then Laʹban departed and returned home.
32 Jacob then went on his way, and the angels of God met up with him. 2 As soon as he saw them, Jacob said: “This is the camp of God!” So he named that place Ma·ha·naʹim.3 Then Jacob sent messengers ahead of him to his brother Eʹsau in the land of Seʹir, the territory of Eʹdom, 4 and he commanded them: “This is what you will say to my lord, to Eʹsau, ‘This is what your servant Jacob says: “I have resided with Laʹban for a long time until now. 5 And I have acquired bulls, donkeys, sheep, and male and female servants, and I send this message to inform my lord, in order to find favor in your eyes.”’”6 In time the messengers returned to Jacob, saying: “We met your brother Eʹsau, and he is now on his way to meet you, and there are 400 men with him.” 7 And Jacob became very frightened and anxious. So he divided the people who were with him, as well as the flocks, the cattle, and the camels, into two camps. 8 He said: “If Eʹsau attacks the one camp, then the other camp will be able to escape.”9 After that Jacob said: “O God of my father Abraham and God of my father Isaac, O Jehovah, you who are saying to me, ‘Return to your land and to your relatives, and I will deal well with you,’ 10 I am unworthy of all the loyal love and of all the faithfulness that you have shown toward your servant, for with only my staff I crossed this Jordan and now I have become two camps. 11 Save me, I pray you, from the hand of my brother Eʹsau, for I am afraid of him that he may come and attack me, as well as the mothers and their children. 12 And you have said: ‘I will certainly deal well with you, and I will make your offspring like the grains of sand of the sea, which are too numerous to count.’”13 And he spent the night there. Then he took some of his possessions as a gift for Eʹsau his brother: 14 200 female goats, 20 male goats, 200 female sheep, 20 rams, 15 30 camels nursing their young, 40 cows, 10 bulls, 20 female donkeys and 10 full-grown male donkeys.16 He handed them over to his servants, one drove after another, and he said to his servants: “Cross over ahead of me, and you are to set a space between one drove and the next.” 17 He also commanded the first one: “In case Eʹsau my brother should meet you and ask, ‘To whom do you belong, and where are you going, and to whom do these ahead of you belong?’ 18 then you should say, ‘To your servant Jacob. It is a gift sent to my lord, to Eʹsau, and look! he himself is also behind us.’” 19 And he commanded also the second, the third, and all those following the droves: “According to this word, you are to speak to Eʹsau when you meet him. 20 And you should also say, ‘Here is your servant Jacob behind us.’” For he said to himself: ‘If I appease him by sending a gift ahead of me, then afterward when I see him, he may give me a kindly reception.’ 21 So the gift crossed over ahead of him, but he himself spent the night in the camp.22 Later during that night, he rose and took his two wives and his two female servants and his 11 young sons and crossed over the ford of Jabʹbok. 23 So he took them and brought them across the stream, and he brought over everything else he had.24 Finally Jacob was left by himself. Then a man began to wrestle with him until the dawn broke. 25 When he saw that he had not prevailed over him, he touched the socket of his hip; and the socket of Jacob’s hip was dislocated during his wrestling with him. 26 After that he said: “Let me go, for the dawn is breaking.” To this he said: “I am not going to let you go until you bless me.” 27 So he said to him: “What is your name?” to which he said: “Jacob.” 28 Then he said: “Your name will no longer be Jacob but Israel, for you have contended with God and with men and you have at last prevailed.” 29 In turn Jacob inquired: “Tell me, please, your name.” However, he said: “Why is it that you ask my name?” With that he blessed him there. 30 So Jacob named the place Pe·niʹel, for he said, “I have seen God face-to-face, yet my life was preserved.”31 And the sun rose upon him as soon as he passed by Pe·nuʹel, but he was limping because of his hip. 32 That is why to this day the sons of Israel are not accustomed to eat the thigh sinew, which is on the socket of the hip joint, because he touched the socket of Jacob’s hip joint by the thigh sinew.
33 Now Jacob raised his eyes and saw Eʹsau coming, and 400 men were with him. So he divided the children among Leʹah, Rachel, and the two female servants. 2 He put the female servants and their children in front, Leʹah and her children after them, and Rachel and Joseph behind them. 3 Then he himself went ahead of them and bowed down to the earth seven times as he came near to his brother.4 But Eʹsau ran to meet him, and he embraced him and kissed him, and they burst into tears. 5 When he raised his eyes and saw the women and the children, he said: “Who are these with you?” to which he said: “The children with whom God has favored your servant.” 6 At that the female servants came forward with their children and bowed down, 7 and Leʹah too came forward with her children, and they bowed down. Then Joseph came forward with Rachel, and they bowed down.8 Eʹsau said: “What is the purpose of all this camp of travelers that I have met?” He replied: “In order to find favor in the eyes of my lord.” 9 Then Eʹsau said: “I have a great many possessions, my brother. Keep what is yours.” 10 However, Jacob said: “No, please. If I have found favor in your eyes, you must take my gift from my hand, because I brought it so that I could see your face. And I have seen your face as though seeing God’s face, in that you received me with pleasure. 11 Take, please, the gift conveying my blessing that was brought to you, for God has favored me and I have everything I need.” And he continued to urge him, so that he took it.12 Later Eʹsau said: “Let us move out and go, and let me go in advance of you.” 13 But he said to him: “My lord is aware that the children are delicate and that in my care are sheep and cattle nursing their young. If they are driven too quickly for one day, then the whole flock will die. 14 Let my lord, please, go on ahead of his servant, but I will continue the journey more slowly at the pace of my livestock and of the children until I come to my lord at Seʹir.” 15 Then Eʹsau said: “Please, let me leave some of my people with you.” To this he said: “Why do this? Just let me find favor in the eyes of my lord.” 16 So that day Eʹsau went on his way back to Seʹir.17 And Jacob journeyed to Sucʹcoth, and he built a house for himself and he made shelters for his herd. That was why he named the place Sucʹcoth.18 After journeying from Padʹdan-aʹram, Jacob arrived safely at the city of Sheʹchem in the land of Caʹnaan, and he set up his camp near the city. 19 Then he acquired a portion of the field where he pitched his tent from the sons of Haʹmor, the father of Sheʹchem, for 100 pieces of money. 20 There he set up an altar and called it God, the God of Israel.
34 Now Diʹnah, Jacob’s daughter by Leʹah, used to go out to spend time with the young women of the land. 2 When Sheʹchem, the son of Haʹmor the Hiʹvite, a chieftain of the land, saw her, he took her and lay down with her and violated her. 3 And he became very attached to Diʹnah, the daughter of Jacob, and he fell in love with the young woman and spoke persuasively to her. 4 Finally Sheʹchem said to Haʹmor his father: “Get me this young woman to be my wife.”5 When Jacob heard that he had defiled Diʹnah his daughter, his sons were with his herd in the field. So Jacob kept silent until they returned. 6 Later Haʹmor, Sheʹchem’s father, went out to speak with Jacob. 7 But the sons of Jacob heard about it and returned from the field right away. They were offended and very angry because he had disgraced Israel by lying down with Jacob’s daughter, something that should not be done.8 Haʹmor spoke with them, saying: “My son Sheʹchem longs for your daughter. Please give her to him as his wife, 9 and form marriage alliances with us. Give us your daughters, and take our daughters for yourselves. 10 You may dwell with us, and the land will become available for you. Dwell and carry on trade in it and settle in it.” 11 Then Sheʹchem said to her father and to her brothers: “Let me find favor in your eyes, and I will give you whatever you ask me. 12 You can demand from me a very high bride price and gift. I am willing to give whatever you may say to me. Just give me the young woman as a wife.”13 And Jacob’s sons answered Sheʹchem and Haʹmor his father deceitfully because he had defiled Diʹnah their sister. 14 They said to them: “We cannot possibly do such a thing, to give our sister to a man who is not circumcised, for that is a disgrace to us. 15 We can only consent on this condition: that you become like us and circumcise all your males. 16 Then we will give our daughters to you, and we will take your daughters for ourselves, and we will dwell with you and become one people. 17 But if you do not listen to us and get circumcised, then we will take our daughter and go.”18 Their words pleased Haʹmor and Sheʹchem, Haʹmor’s son. 19 The young man did not delay in doing what they asked, because he found delight in Jacob’s daughter, and he was the most honorable of the whole house of his father.20 So Haʹmor and his son Sheʹchem went to the city gate and spoke to the men of their city, saying: 21 “These men wish to be at peace with us. Let them dwell in the land and carry on trade in it, for the land is large enough to accommodate them. We can take their daughters as wives, and our daughters we can give to them. 22 Only on this one condition will the men consent to dwell with us in order to become one people: that every male among us be circumcised just the way they are circumcised. 23 Then, will not their possessions, their wealth, and all their livestock be ours? So let us give them our consent that they may dwell with us.” 24 All those going out by the gate of his city listened to Haʹmor and to his son Sheʹchem, and all the males got circumcised, all those going out of the city gate.25 However, on the third day, when they were still in pain, two sons of Jacob, Simʹe·on and Leʹvi, Diʹnah’s brothers, each took his sword and went into the unsuspecting city and killed every male. 26 They killed Haʹmor and his son Sheʹchem with the sword and then took Diʹnah from Sheʹchem’s house and left. 27 Jacob’s other sons came upon the slain men and plundered the city because they had defiled their sister. 28 They took their flocks, their herds, their donkeys, and whatever was in the city and in the field. 29 They also took all their possessions, captured all their little children and their wives, and plundered everything in the houses.30 At this Jacob said to Simʹe·on and to Leʹvi: “You have brought great trouble on me in making me a stench to the inhabitants of the land, to the Caʹnaan·ites and the Perʹiz·zites. I am few in number, and they will certainly gather together to attack me and I will be annihilated, I and my house.” 31 But they said: “Should anyone treat our sister like a prostitute?”
35 After that God said to Jacob: “Rise, go up to Bethʹel and dwell there, and make an altar there to the true God, who appeared to you when you were running away from Eʹsau your brother.”2 Then Jacob said to his household and to all who were with him: “Get rid of the foreign gods that are in your midst, and cleanse yourselves and change your garments, 3 and let us rise and go up to Bethʹel. There I will make an altar to the true God, who answered me in the day of my distress and who has been with me wherever I have gone.” 4 So they gave Jacob all the foreign gods they had and the earrings that were in their ears, and Jacob buried them under the big tree that was close to Sheʹchem.5 When they traveled on, the terror of God struck the cities around them, so they did not chase after the sons of Jacob. 6 Jacob eventually came to Luz, that is, Bethʹel, in the land of Caʹnaan, he and all the people with him. 7 There he built an altar and called the place El-bethʹel, because there the true God had revealed himself to him when he had run away from his brother. 8 Later Debʹo·rah, Re·bekʹah’s nurse, died and was buried at the foot of Bethʹel under an oak. So he named it Alʹlon-bacʹuth.9 God appeared to Jacob once again while he was coming from Padʹdan-aʹram and blessed him. 10 God said to him: “Your name is Jacob. Your name will no longer be Jacob, but Israel will be your name.” And he began to call him Israel. 11 God further said to him: “I am God Almighty. Be fruitful and become many. Nations and a congregation of nations will come from you, and kings will descend from you. 12 As for the land that I have given to Abraham and to Isaac, to you I will give it, and to your offspring after you I will give the land.” 13 Then God went up from him at the place where he had spoken with him.14 So Jacob set up a pillar in the place where he had spoken with him, a pillar of stone, and he poured a drink offering on it and poured oil on it. 15 And Jacob continued to call the place where God had spoken with him Bethʹel.16 Then they pulled away from Bethʹel. And while they were still some distance from Ephʹrath, Rachel began to give birth, and her labor was very difficult. 17 But while she was struggling to deliver the child, the midwife said to her: “Do not be afraid, for you will have this son also.” 18 Just as her life was slipping away (for she was dying), she named him Ben-oʹni, but his father called him Benjamin. 19 So Rachel died and was buried on the way to Ephʹrath, that is, Bethʹle·hem. 20 Jacob set up a pillar over her grave; it is the pillar of Rachel’s grave to this day.21 After that Israel pulled away and pitched his tent a distance beyond the tower of Eʹder. 22 Once while Israel was dwelling in that land, Reuʹben went and lay down with Bilʹhah his father’s concubine, and Israel heard about it.So there were 12 sons of Jacob. 23 The sons by Leʹah were Jacob’s firstborn Reuʹben, then Simʹe·on, Leʹvi, Judah, Isʹsa·char, and Zebʹu·lun. 24 The sons by Rachel were Joseph and Benjamin. 25 And the sons by Bilʹhah, Rachel’s servant, were Dan and Naphʹta·li. 26 And the sons by Zilʹpah, Leʹah’s servant, were Gad and Ashʹer. These are Jacob’s sons, who were born to him in Padʹdan-aʹram.27 Jacob eventually came to where his father Isaac was at Mamʹre, to Kirʹi·ath-arʹba, that is, Hebʹron, where Abraham and also Isaac had resided as foreigners. 28 Isaac lived to be 180 years old. 29 Then Isaac breathed his last and died and was gathered to his people, after a long and satisfying life; and his sons Eʹsau and Jacob buried him.
36 This is the history of Eʹsau, that is, Eʹdom.2 Eʹsau took his wives from the daughters of Caʹnaan: Aʹdah the daughter of Eʹlon the Hitʹtite; and O·hol·i·baʹmah the daughter of Aʹnah, the granddaughter of Zibʹe·on the Hiʹvite; 3 and Basʹe·math, Ishʹma·el’s daughter, the sister of Ne·baʹioth.4 And Aʹdah bore Elʹi·phaz to Eʹsau, and Basʹe·math bore Reuʹel, 5 and O·hol·i·baʹmah bore Jeʹush, Jaʹlam, and Korʹah.These are the sons of Eʹsau, who were born to him in the land of Caʹnaan. 6 After that Eʹsau took his wives, his sons, his daughters, all the members of his household, his herd and all his other beasts, and all the wealth he had accumulated in the land of Caʹnaan and he went to another land some distance away from Jacob his brother. 7 For their goods had become too many for them to dwell together, and the land where they were residing was not able to sustain them because of their herds. 8 So Eʹsau took up dwelling in the mountainous region of Seʹir. Eʹsau is Eʹdom.9 And this is the history of Eʹsau the father of Eʹdom in the mountainous region of Seʹir.10 These are the names of the sons of Eʹsau: Elʹi·phaz the son of Aʹdah, Eʹsau’s wife; Reuʹel the son of Basʹe·math, Eʹsau’s wife.11 The sons of Elʹi·phaz were Teʹman, Oʹmar, Zeʹpho, Gaʹtam, and Keʹnaz. 12 Timʹna became the concubine of Elʹi·phaz, Eʹsau’s son. In time she bore to Elʹi·phaz, Amʹa·lek. These are the sons of Aʹdah, Eʹsau’s wife.13 These are the sons of Reuʹel: Naʹhath, Zeʹrah, Shamʹmah, and Mizʹzah. These were the sons of Basʹe·math, Eʹsau’s wife.14 These were the sons of O·hol·i·baʹmah the daughter of Aʹnah, the granddaughter of Zibʹe·on, Eʹsau’s wife, whom she bore to Eʹsau: Jeʹush, Jaʹlam, and Korʹah.15 These are the sheikhs of the sons of Eʹsau: The sons of Elʹi·phaz, Eʹsau’s firstborn: Sheikh Teʹman, Sheikh Oʹmar, Sheikh Zeʹpho, Sheikh Keʹnaz, 16 Sheikh Korʹah, Sheikh Gaʹtam, and Sheikh Amʹa·lek. These are the sheikhs of Elʹi·phaz in the land of Eʹdom. These are the sons by Aʹdah.17 These are the sons of Reuʹel, Eʹsau’s son: Sheikh Naʹhath, Sheikh Zeʹrah, Sheikh Shamʹmah, and Sheikh Mizʹzah. These are the sheikhs of Reuʹel in the land of Eʹdom. These are the sons by Basʹe·math, Eʹsau’s wife.18 Finally these are the sons of O·hol·i·baʹmah, Eʹsau’s wife: Sheikh Jeʹush, Sheikh Jaʹlam, and Sheikh Korʹah. These are the sheikhs of O·hol·i·baʹmah the daughter of Aʹnah, Eʹsau’s wife.19 These are the sons of Eʹsau, and these are their sheikhs. He is Eʹdom.20 These are the sons of Seʹir the Horʹite, the inhabitants of the land: Loʹtan, Shoʹbal, Zibʹe·on, Aʹnah, 21 Diʹshon, Eʹzer, and Diʹshan. These are the sheikhs of the Horʹites, the sons of Seʹir, in the land of Eʹdom.22 The sons of Loʹtan were Hoʹri and Heʹmam, and Loʹtan’s sister was Timʹna.23 These are the sons of Shoʹbal: Alʹvan, Manʹa·hath, Eʹbal, Sheʹpho, and Oʹnam.24 These are the sons of Zibʹe·on: Aʹiah and Aʹnah. This is the Aʹnah who found the hot springs in the wilderness while he was tending the donkeys for Zibʹe·on his father.25 These are the children of Aʹnah: Diʹshon and O·hol·i·baʹmah the daughter of Aʹnah.26 These are the sons of Diʹshon: Hemʹdan, Eshʹban, Ithʹran, and Cheʹran.27 These are the sons of Eʹzer: Bilʹhan, Zaʹa·van, and Aʹkan.28 These are the sons of Diʹshan: Uz and Aʹran.29 These are the sheikhs of the Horʹites: Sheikh Loʹtan, Sheikh Shoʹbal, Sheikh Zibʹe·on, Sheikh Aʹnah, 30 Sheikh Diʹshon, Sheikh Eʹzer, and Sheikh Diʹshan. These are the sheikhs of the Horʹites according to their sheikhs in the land of Seʹir.31 Now these are the kings who reigned in the land of Eʹdom before any king reigned over the Israelites. 32 Beʹla son of Beʹor reigned in Eʹdom, and the name of his city was Dinʹha·bah. 33 When Beʹla died, Joʹbab son of Zeʹrah from Bozʹrah began to reign in his place. 34 When Joʹbab died, Huʹsham from the land of the Teʹman·ites began to reign in his place. 35 When Huʹsham died, Haʹdad son of Beʹdad, who defeated the Midʹi·an·ites in the territory of Moʹab, began to reign in his place, and the name of his city was Aʹvith. 36 When Haʹdad died, Samʹlah from Mas·reʹkah began to reign in his place. 37 When Samʹlah died, Shaʹul from Re·hoʹboth by the River began to reign in his place. 38 When Shaʹul died, Baʹal-haʹnan the son of Achʹbor began to reign in his place. 39 When Baʹal-haʹnan the son of Achʹbor died, Haʹdar began to reign in his place. The name of his city was Paʹu, and the name of his wife was Me·hetʹa·bel the daughter of Maʹtred the daughter of Meʹza·hab.40 So these are the names of the sheikhs of Eʹsau according to their families, according to their places, by their names: Sheikh Timʹna, Sheikh Alʹvah, Sheikh Jeʹtheth, 41 Sheikh O·hol·i·baʹmah, Sheikh Eʹlah, Sheikh Piʹnon, 42 Sheikh Keʹnaz, Sheikh Teʹman, Sheikh Mibʹzar, 43 Sheikh Magʹdi·el, and Sheikh Iʹram. These are the sheikhs of Eʹdom according to their settlements in the land of their possession. This is Eʹsau the father of Eʹdom.
37 Jacob continued to dwell in the land of Caʹnaan, where his father had lived as a foreigner.2 This is the history of Jacob.When Joseph was 17 years old, the young man was tending the flock with the sons of Bilʹhah and the sons of Zilʹpah, the wives of his father. And Joseph brought a bad report about them to their father. 3 Now Israel loved Joseph more than all his other sons because he was the son of his old age, and he had a special robe made for him. 4 When his brothers saw that their father loved him more than all his brothers, they began to hate him, and they could not speak peaceably to him.5 Later Joseph had a dream and told it to his brothers, and they found further reason to hate him. 6 He said to them: “Please listen to this dream that I had. 7 There we were binding sheaves in the middle of the field when my sheaf got up and stood erect and your sheaves encircled and bowed down to my sheaf.” 8 His brothers said to him: “Are you really going to make yourself king over us and dominate us?” So they found another reason to hate him, because of his dreams and what he said.9 After that he had still another dream, and he related it to his brothers: “I have had another dream. This time the sun and the moon and 11 stars were bowing down to me.” 10 Then he related it to his father as well as his brothers, and his father rebuked him and said to him: “What is the meaning of this dream of yours? Am I as well as your mother and your brothers really going to come and bow down to the earth to you?” 11 And his brothers grew jealous of him, but his father kept the saying in mind.12 His brothers now went to pasture their father’s flock near Sheʹchem. 13 Israel later said to Joseph: “Your brothers are tending flocks near Sheʹchem, are they not? Come, and let me send you to them.” At this he said to him: “I am ready!” 14 So he said to him: “Go, please, and see whether your brothers are well. See how the flock is, and bring word back to me.” With that he sent him away from the valley of Hebʹron, and he went on toward Sheʹchem. 15 Later a man found him as he was wandering in a field. The man asked him: “What are you looking for?” 16 To this he said: “I am looking for my brothers. Please tell me, where are they tending flocks?” 17 The man continued: “They have pulled away from here, for I heard them saying, ‘Let us go to Doʹthan.’” So Joseph went after his brothers and found them at Doʹthan.18 Now they caught sight of him from a distance, and before he reached them, they began plotting against him to put him to death. 19 So they said to one another: “Look! Here comes that dreamer. 20 Come, now, let us kill him and pitch him into one of the waterpits, and we will say that a vicious wild animal devoured him. Then let us see what will become of his dreams.” 21 When Reuʹben heard this, he tried to rescue him from them. So he said: “Let us not take his life.” 22 Reuʹben said to them: “Do not shed blood. Throw him into this waterpit in the wilderness, but do not harm him.” His purpose was to rescue him from them in order to return him to his father.23 So as soon as Joseph came to his brothers, they stripped Joseph of his robe, the special robe that he wore, 24 and they took him and threw him into the waterpit. At the time the pit was empty; there was no water in it.25 Then they sat down to eat. When they looked up, there was a caravan of Ishʹma·el·ites coming from Gilʹe·ad. Their camels were carrying labdanum gum, balsam, and resinous bark, and they were on their way down to Egypt. 26 At this Judah said to his brothers: “What profit would there be if we killed our brother and covered over his blood? 27 Come, now, let us sell him to the Ishʹma·el·ites, and do not let our hand be upon him. After all, he is our brother, our flesh.” So they listened to their brother. 28 And when the Midʹi·an·ite merchants were passing by, they lifted Joseph up out of the waterpit and sold him to the Ishʹma·el·ites for 20 pieces of silver. These men took Joseph into Egypt.29 Later when Reuʹben returned to the waterpit and saw that Joseph was not in the waterpit, he ripped his garments apart. 30 When he returned to his brothers, he exclaimed: “The child is gone! And I—what am I going to do?”31 So they took Joseph’s robe and slaughtered a male goat and dipped the robe in the blood. 32 After that they sent the special robe to their father and said: “This is what we found. Please examine whether this is your son’s robe or not.” 33 Then he examined it and exclaimed: “It is my son’s robe! A vicious wild animal must have devoured him! Joseph is surely torn to pieces!” 34 With that Jacob ripped his garments apart and put sackcloth around his waist and mourned his son for many days. 35 And all his sons and all his daughters kept trying to comfort him, but he kept refusing to take comfort, saying: “I will go down into the Grave mourning my son!” And his father continued weeping for him.36 Now the Midʹi·an·ites sold him in Egypt to Potʹi·phar, a court official of Pharʹaoh and the chief of the guard.
38 About that time Judah left his brothers and pitched his tent near an A·dulʹlam·ite man named Hiʹrah. 2 There Judah saw the daughter of a certain Caʹnaan·ite named Shuʹa. So he took her and had relations with her, 3 and she became pregnant. Later she bore a son, and he named him Er. 4 Again she became pregnant and bore a son and named him Oʹnan. 5 Yet again she bore a son and named him Sheʹlah. He was in Achʹzib when she bore him.6 In time Judah took a wife for Er his firstborn, and her name was Taʹmar. 7 But Er, Judah’s firstborn, was displeasing to Jehovah; so Jehovah put him to death. 8 In view of that, Judah said to Oʹnan: “Have relations with your brother’s wife and perform brother-in-law marriage with her and raise up offspring for your brother.” 9 But Oʹnan knew that the offspring would not be considered his. So when he did have relations with his brother’s wife, he wasted his semen on the ground so as not to give offspring to his brother. 10 What he did was bad in the eyes of Jehovah, so he also put him to death. 11 Judah said to Taʹmar his daughter-in-law: “Dwell as a widow in the house of your father until my son Sheʹlah grows up,” for he said to himself: ‘He too may die like his brothers.’ So Taʹmar went and stayed in her own father’s house.12 Some time passed, and Judah’s wife, the daughter of Shuʹa, died. Judah kept the mourning period, and then he went to his sheepshearers in Timʹnah with his companion Hiʹrah the A·dulʹlam·ite. 13 Taʹmar was told: “Here your father-in-law is going up to Timʹnah to shear his sheep.” 14 With that she removed her widow’s clothing and veiled herself and covered herself with a shawl and sat down at the entrance of E·naʹim, which is on the road to Timʹnah, for she saw that Sheʹlah had grown up and yet she had not been given to him as a wife.15 When Judah caught sight of her, he at once took her for a prostitute, because she had covered her face. 16 So he turned aside to her by the road and said: “Allow me, please, to have relations with you,” for he did not know that she was his daughter-in-law. However, she said: “What will you give me that you may have relations with me?” 17 To this he said: “I will send a young goat from my herd.” But she said: “Will you give a security until you send it?” 18 He continued: “What security should I give you?” to which she said: “Your seal ring and your cord and your rod that is in your hand.” Then he gave them to her and had relations with her, and she became pregnant by him. 19 After that she got up and went away and removed her shawl and clothed herself with her widow’s clothing.20 And Judah sent the young goat by the hand of his companion the A·dulʹlam·ite, to get back the security from the hand of the woman, but he never found her. 21 He inquired of the men of her place, saying: “Where is that temple prostitute in E·naʹim along the road?” But they said: “No temple prostitute has ever been in this place.” 22 Finally he returned to Judah and said: “I never found her, and besides, the men of the place said, ‘No temple prostitute has ever been in this place.’” 23 So Judah said: “Let her take them for herself, in order that we may not fall into contempt. At any rate, I have sent this young goat, but you never found her.”24 However, about three months later, Judah was told: “Taʹmar your daughter-in-law has acted as a prostitute, and she is also pregnant by her prostitution.” At that Judah said: “Bring her out and let her be burned.” 25 As she was being brought out, she sent word to her father-in-law: “I am pregnant by the man to whom these belong.” Then she added: “Please examine to whom these belong, the seal ring and the cord and the rod.” 26 Then Judah examined them and said: “She is more righteous than I am, because I did not give her to Sheʹlah my son.” And he had no further sexual relations with her after that.27 When the time came for her to give birth, there were twins in her womb. 28 As she was giving birth, one put out his hand, and the midwife immediately took a scarlet thread and tied it around his hand, saying: “This one came out first.” 29 But as soon as he drew back his hand, his brother came out, and she exclaimed: “What a breach you have made for yourself!” So he was named Peʹrez. 30 Afterward his brother came out, around whose hand the scarlet thread was tied, and he was named Zeʹrah.
39 Now Joseph was taken down to Egypt, and an Egyptian named Potʹi·phar, a court official of Pharʹaoh and chief of the guard, bought him from the Ishʹma·el·ites who had taken him down there. 2 But Jehovah was with Joseph. As a result, he became successful and was put over the house of his master, the Egyptian. 3 And his master saw that Jehovah was with him and that Jehovah was making everything that he did successful.4 Joseph kept finding favor in his eyes, and he became his personal attendant. So he appointed him over his house, and he put him in charge of all that was his. 5 From the time he appointed him over his house and in charge of all that was his, Jehovah kept blessing the house of the Egyptian because of Joseph, and Jehovah’s blessing came to be on all that he had in the house and in the field. 6 He eventually left everything that was his in Joseph’s care, and he gave no thought to anything except the food he was eating. Moreover, Joseph grew to be well-built and handsome.7 Now after these things, the wife of his master began to cast her eyes on Joseph and say: “Lie down with me.” 8 But he refused and said to his master’s wife: “Here my master does not know what is with me in the house, and he has entrusted everything he has into my care. 9 There is no one greater in this house than I am, and he has not withheld from me anything at all except you, because you are his wife. So how could I commit this great badness and actually sin against God?”10 So day after day she spoke to Joseph, but he never consented to lie with her or to remain with her. 11 But on one of the days when he went into the house to do his work, none of the household servants were in the house. 12 Then she grabbed hold of him by his garment and said: “Lie down with me!” But he left his garment in her hand and fled outside. 13 As soon as she saw that he had left his garment in her hand and had fled outside, 14 she began to cry out to the men of her house and to say to them: “Look! He brought to us this Hebrew man to make us a laughingstock. He came to me to lie down with me, but I began to cry out at the top of my voice. 15 Then as soon as he heard me raising my voice and screaming, he left his garment beside me and fled outside.” 16 After that she laid his garment beside her until his master came to his house.17 Then she told him the same thing, saying: “The Hebrew servant whom you brought to us came to me to make me a laughingstock. 18 But as soon as I raised my voice and began to scream, he left his garment beside me and fled outside.” 19 As soon as his master heard the words his wife spoke to him, saying: “These are the things your servant did to me,” his anger blazed. 20 So Joseph’s master took him and gave him over to the prison, the place where the prisoners of the king were kept under arrest, and he remained there in the prison.21 But Jehovah continued with Joseph and kept showing loyal love to him and granting him favor in the eyes of the chief officer of the prison. 22 So the chief officer of the prison put Joseph in charge of all the prisoners in the prison, and everything that they were doing there, he was the one having it done. 23 The chief officer of the prison was looking after absolutely nothing that was in Joseph’s care, for Jehovah was with Joseph and Jehovah made whatever he did successful.
4 Now Adam had sexual relations with his wife Eve, and she became pregnant. When she gave birth to Cain, she said: “I have produced a male child with the help of Jehovah.” 2 Later she again gave birth, to his brother Abel.Abel became a shepherd of the flock, but Cain became a cultivator of the ground. 3 After some time, Cain brought some fruits of the land as an offering to Jehovah. 4 But Abel brought some firstlings of his flock, including their fat. While Jehovah looked with favor on Abel and on his offering, 5 he did not look with any favor on Cain and on his offering. So Cain grew hot with anger and was dejected. 6 Then Jehovah said to Cain: “Why are you so angry and dejected? 7 If you turn to doing good, will you not be restored to favor? But if you do not turn to doing good, sin is crouching at the door, and its craving is to dominate you; but will you get the mastery over it?”8 After that Cain said to his brother Abel: “Let us go over into the field.” So while they were in the field, Cain assaulted his brother Abel and killed him. 9 Later on, Jehovah said to Cain: “Where is your brother Abel?” and he said: “I do not know. Am I my brother’s guardian?” 10 At this He said: “What have you done? Listen! Your brother’s blood is crying out to me from the ground. 11 And now you are cursed in banishment from the ground that has opened its mouth to receive your brother’s blood from your hand. 12 When you cultivate the ground, it will not give you back its produce. You will become a wanderer and a fugitive in the earth.” 13 At this Cain said to Jehovah: “The punishment for my error is too great to bear. 14 Today you are driving me from the land, and I will be hidden from your face; and I will become a wanderer and a fugitive on the earth, and anyone who finds me will certainly kill me.” 15 So Jehovah said to him: “For that reason, anyone who kills Cain will suffer vengeance seven times.”So Jehovah set up a sign for Cain in order that no one finding him would strike him. 16 Then Cain went away from before Jehovah and took up residence in the land of Exile, to the east of Eʹden.17 Afterward Cain had sexual relations with his wife, and she became pregnant and gave birth to Eʹnoch. Then he engaged in building a city and named the city after his son Eʹnoch. 18 Later Iʹrad was born to Eʹnoch. And Iʹrad became father to Me·huʹja·el, and Me·huʹja·el became father to Me·thuʹsha·el, and Me·thuʹsha·el became father to Laʹmech.19 Laʹmech took two wives for himself. The name of the first was Aʹdah, and the name of the second was Zilʹlah. 20 Aʹdah gave birth to Jaʹbal. He was the founder of those who dwell in tents and have livestock. 21 His brother’s name was Juʹbal. He was the founder of all those who play the harp and the pipe. 22 Also, Zilʹlah gave birth to Tuʹbal-cain, who forged every sort of tool of copper and iron. And the sister of Tuʹbal-cain was Naʹa·mah. 23 Then Laʹmech composed these words for his wives Aʹdah and Zilʹlah:“Hear my voice, you wives of Laʹmech;Give ear to my saying:A man I have killed for wounding me,Yes, a young man for striking me.24 If 7 times Cain is to be avenged,Then Laʹmech 77 times.”25 Adam again had sexual relations with his wife, and she gave birth to a son. She named him Seth because, as she said, “God has appointed for me another offspring in place of Abel, because Cain killed him.” 26 There was also born to Seth a son, and he named him Eʹnosh. At that time people began calling on the name of Jehovah.
40 After these things, the chief cupbearer of the king of Egypt and the chief baker sinned against their lord, the king of Egypt. 2 So Pharʹaoh grew indignant at his two officers, the chief cupbearer and the chief baker, 3 and he committed them to the jail of the house of the chief of the guard, to the place where Joseph was a prisoner. 4 Then the chief of the guard assigned Joseph to be with them and to take care of them, and they remained in jail for some time.5 The cupbearer and the baker of the king of Egypt, who were confined in the prison, each had a dream on the same night, and each dream had its own interpretation. 6 The next morning, when Joseph came in and saw them, they looked dejected. 7 So he asked the officers of Pharʹaoh who were in custody with him in his master’s house: “Why are your faces gloomy today?” 8 At this they said to him: “We each had a dream, but there is no interpreter with us.” Joseph said to them: “Do not interpretations belong to God? Relate it to me, please.”9 So the chief cupbearer related his dream to Joseph, saying to him: “In my dream, there was a vine before me. 10 And on the vine, there were three twigs, and as it was sprouting shoots, it blossomed, and its clusters ripened into grapes. 11 And Pharʹaoh’s cup was in my hand, and I took the grapes and squeezed them out into Pharʹaoh’s cup. After that I put the cup in Pharʹaoh’s hand.” 12 Then Joseph said to him: “This is its interpretation: The three twigs are three days. 13 Three days from now, Pharʹaoh will bring you out, restoring you to your office, and you will put Pharʹaoh’s cup into his hand as you did before when you were his cupbearer. 14 Nevertheless, you must remember me when things go well with you. Please show me loyal love and mention me to Pharʹaoh, in order to get me out of this place. 15 I was, in fact, kidnapped from the land of the Hebrews, and I have not done anything here for which they should put me in prison.”16 When the chief baker saw that Joseph had interpreted something good, he said to him: “I too was in my dream, and there were three baskets of white bread on my head, 17 and in the top basket, there were all sorts of baked goods for Pharʹaoh, and there were birds eating them out of the basket on top of my head.” 18 Then Joseph answered, “This is its interpretation: The three baskets are three days. 19 Three days from now, Pharʹaoh will behead you and will hang you on a stake, and the birds will eat your flesh from you.”20 Now the third day was Pharʹaoh’s birthday, and he made a feast for all his servants, and he brought out both the chief cupbearer and the chief baker in the presence of his servants. 21 And he returned the chief cupbearer to his post of cupbearer, and he continued to hand the cup to Pharʹaoh. 22 But he hanged the chief baker, just as Joseph had interpreted to them. 23 However, the chief cupbearer did not remember Joseph; he kept forgetting him.
41 At the end of two full years, Pharʹaoh dreamed that he was standing by the Nile River. 2 And there, coming up from the river, were seven fine-looking, fat cows, and they were feeding on the Nile grass. 3 There were seven other cows that looked ugly and thin coming up after them from the Nile, and they stood alongside the fat cows by the bank of the Nile. 4 Then the ugly, thin cows began to eat up the seven fine-looking, fat cows. At this Pharʹaoh woke up.5 Then he went back to sleep and had a second dream. There were seven ears of grain coming up on one stalk, full and choice. 6 And growing up after them were seven ears of grain that were thin and scorched by the east wind. 7 And the thin ears of grain began to swallow up the seven full and choice ears of grain. At this Pharʹaoh woke up and realized that it was a dream.8 But in the morning, his spirit became agitated. So he sent for all the magic-practicing priests of Egypt and all her wise men. Pharʹaoh related his dreams to them, but there was no one who could interpret them for Pharʹaoh.9 At that the chief cupbearer spoke with Pharʹaoh, saying: “I am confessing my sins today. 10 Pharʹaoh was indignant at his servants. So he committed me to the jail of the house of the chief of the guard, both me and the chief baker. 11 After that we each had a dream on the same night. He and I each had a dream with its own interpretation. 12 And there with us was a young Hebrew man, a servant of the chief of the guard. When we related them to him, he interpreted for us the meaning of each dream. 13 It happened exactly as he had interpreted to us. I was restored to my office, but the other man was hanged.”14 So Pharʹaoh sent for Joseph, and they brought him quickly from the prison. He shaved and changed his clothes and went in to Pharʹaoh. 15 Then Pharʹaoh said to Joseph: “I had a dream, but there is no one to interpret it. Now I have heard it said about you that you can hear a dream and interpret it.” 16 At this Joseph answered Pharʹaoh: “I need not be considered! God will speak concerning Pharʹaoh’s welfare.”17 Pharʹaoh went on to say to Joseph: “In my dream I was standing on the bank of the Nile River. 18 And there, coming up from the Nile, were seven fine-looking, fat cows, and they began to feed on the Nile grass. 19 And there were seven other cows coming up after them, poor and very bad-looking and thin. I have never seen such bad-looking cows in all the land of Egypt. 20 And the skinny, bad cows began to eat up the first seven fat cows. 21 But when they had consumed them, no one could have known that they had done so, since their appearance was just as bad as at the start. At that I woke up.22 “After that I saw in my dream seven ears of grain coming up on one stalk, full and choice. 23 Growing up after them were seven ears of shriveled grain, thin and scorched by the east wind. 24 Then the thin ears of grain began to swallow up the seven choice ears of grain. So I told it to the magic-practicing priests, but there was no one who could explain it to me.”25 Then Joseph said to Pharʹaoh: “The dreams of Pharʹaoh are one and the same. The true God has told to Pharʹaoh what He will do. 26 The seven good cows are seven years. Likewise, the seven good ears of grain are seven years. The dreams are one and the same. 27 The seven skinny and bad cows that came up after them are seven years, and the seven empty ears of grain, scorched by the east wind, will prove to be seven years of famine. 28 This is just as I told to Pharʹaoh: The true God has caused Pharʹaoh to see what He will do.29 “There are to be seven years of great abundance in all the land of Egypt. 30 But seven years of famine will certainly arise after them, and all the abundance in the land of Egypt will certainly be forgotten, and the famine will exhaust the land. 31 And the previous abundance in the land will not be remembered because of the famine afterward, for it will be very severe. 32 The dream was given twice to Pharʹaoh because the matter has been firmly established by the true God, and the true God will soon carry it out.33 “So now let Pharʹaoh look for a man who is discreet and wise and place him over the land of Egypt. 34 Let Pharʹaoh take action and appoint overseers in the land, and he should collect one fifth of the produce of Egypt during the seven years of abundance. 35 And let them collect all the food during these coming good years, and let them stockpile grain under Pharʹaoh’s authority as food to be stored in the cities and safeguarded there. 36 The food should serve as a supply for the land for the seven years of famine that will occur in the land of Egypt, so that the land may not perish in the famine.”37 This proposal seemed good to Pharʹaoh and all his servants. 38 So Pharʹaoh said to his servants: “Can another man be found like this one in whom there is the spirit of God?” 39 Pharʹaoh then said to Joseph: “Since God has caused you to know all of this, there is no one as discreet and wise as you. 40 You will personally be over my house, and all my people will obey you implicitly. Only in my role as king will I be greater than you.” 41 And Pharʹaoh added to Joseph: “See, I am putting you over all the land of Egypt.” 42 Then Pharʹaoh removed his signet ring from his own hand and put it on Joseph’s hand and clothed him with garments of fine linen and placed a necklace of gold around his neck. 43 Moreover, he had him ride in the second chariot of honor that he had, and they would call out ahead of him, “A·vrékh!” Thus he put him over all the land of Egypt.44 Pharʹaoh further said to Joseph: “I am Pharʹaoh, but without your authorization, no man may do a single thing in all the land of Egypt.” 45 After that Pharʹaoh gave Joseph the name Zaphʹe·nath-pa·neʹah and gave him Asʹe·nath the daughter of Pot·iʹphe·ra the priest of On as a wife. And Joseph began to oversee the land of Egypt. 46 Joseph was 30 years old when he stood before Pharʹaoh king of Egypt.Then Joseph went out from before Pharʹaoh and traveled throughout all the land of Egypt. 47 And during the seven years of abundance, the land went on producing plentifully. 48 And he kept collecting all the food of the seven years from the land of Egypt, and he would stockpile the food in the cities. In each city he would store the food from the fields around it. 49 Joseph continued stockpiling grain in very great quantity, like the sand of the sea, until finally they gave up measuring it because it could not be measured.50 Before the year of the famine arrived, two sons were born to Joseph, whom Asʹe·nath the daughter of Pot·iʹphe·ra the priest of On bore to him. 51 Joseph named the firstborn Ma·nasʹseh, for he said, “God has made me forget all my trouble and all the house of my father.” 52 And he named the second one Eʹphra·im, for he said, “God has made me fruitful in the land of my affliction.”53 Then the seven years of abundance in the land of Egypt ended, 54 and the seven years of famine began, just as Joseph had said. The famine developed in all the lands, but in all the land of Egypt there was bread. 55 Eventually, all the land of Egypt suffered from the famine, and the people began to cry to Pharʹaoh for bread. Then Pharʹaoh said to all the Egyptians: “Go to Joseph, and do whatever he tells you.” 56 The famine continued over all the surface of the earth. Then Joseph began to open up all the granaries that were among them and to sell to the Egyptians, as the famine had a strong grip on the land of Egypt. 57 Moreover, people of all the earth came to Egypt to buy from Joseph, because the famine had a strong grip on all the earth.
42 When Jacob learned that there was grain in Egypt, he said to his sons: “Why do you just keep looking at one another?” 2 He added: “I have heard that there is grain in Egypt. Go down there and buy some for us, so that we may stay alive and not die.” 3 So ten of Joseph’s brothers went down to buy grain from Egypt. 4 But Jacob did not send Benjamin, Joseph’s brother, with his other brothers, for he said: “Perhaps a fatal accident may befall him.”5 So Israel’s sons came along with the others who were coming to buy, because the famine had extended to the land of Caʹnaan. 6 Joseph was the man in authority over the land, and he was the one who sold grain to all the people of the earth. So Joseph’s brothers came and bowed low to him with their faces to the ground. 7 When Joseph saw his brothers, he immediately recognized them, but he concealed his identity from them. So he spoke harshly with them and said: “Where have you come from?” to which they said: “From the land of Caʹnaan to buy food.”8 Thus Joseph recognized his brothers, but they did not recognize him. 9 Joseph immediately remembered the dreams that he had dreamed about them, and he said to them: “You are spies! You have come to see the vulnerable areas of the land!” 10 Then they said to him: “No, my lord, but your servants have come to buy food. 11 We are all sons of but one man. We are upright men. Your servants do not act as spies.” 12 But he said to them: “Not so! You have come to see the vulnerable areas of the land!” 13 At this they said: “Your servants are 12 brothers. We are the sons of but one man in the land of Caʹnaan, and the youngest is now with our father, whereas the other one is no more.”14 However, Joseph said to them: “It is just as I said to you—‘You are spies!’ 15 By this you will be tested: As surely as Pharʹaoh lives, you will not leave this place until your youngest brother comes here. 16 Send one of you to bring your brother while you remain in bondage. In this way, your words may be tested out to see if you are telling the truth. And if not, then, as surely as Pharʹaoh lives, you are spies.” 17 With that he put them together in custody for three days.18 Joseph said to them on the third day: “Do this and live, for I fear God. 19 If you are upright, let one of your brothers remain in bondage in your house of custody, but the rest of you may go and take grain to alleviate the famine in your households. 20 Then bring your youngest brother to me, so that your words will be found trustworthy and you will not die.” And they did so.21 And they said to one another: “We are surely being punished on account of our brother, because we saw his distress when he begged us to show compassion, but we did not listen. That is why this distress has come upon us.” 22 Then Reuʹben answered them: “Did I not say to you, ‘Do not sin against the child,’ but you would not listen? Now his blood is certainly being asked back.” 23 But they did not know that Joseph understood, for there was an interpreter between them. 24 So he turned away from them and began to weep. When he returned and spoke to them again, he took Simʹe·on from them and bound him before their eyes. 25 Joseph then gave the command to fill up their bags with grain and to return each man’s money to his own sack and to give them provisions for the journey. This was done for them.26 So they loaded their grain on their donkeys and left from there. 27 When one of them opened his sack to give fodder to his donkey at the lodging place, he saw his money there in the mouth of his bag. 28 At that he said to his brothers: “My money has been returned, and now here it is in my bag!” Then their hearts sank, and trembling, they turned to one another and said: “What is this that God has done to us?”29 When they came to Jacob their father in the land of Caʹnaan, they told him all the things that had befallen them, saying: 30 “The man who is the lord of the country spoke harshly with us and accused us of spying on the country. 31 But we said to him, ‘We are upright men. We are not spies. 32 We are 12 brothers, the sons of our father. One is no more, and the youngest is now with our father in the land of Caʹnaan.’ 33 But the man who is the lord of the country said to us, ‘By this I will know that you are upright: Leave one of your brothers with me. Then take something to alleviate the famine in your households and go. 34 And bring your youngest brother to me, so that I may know that you are not spies but upright men. I will then give your brother back to you, and you may carry on trade in the land.’”35 As they were emptying their sacks, here was each one’s bag of money in his sack. When they and their father saw their bags of money, they became afraid. 36 Jacob their father exclaimed to them: “It is I you have bereaved! Joseph is no more, and Simʹe·on is no more, and you are going to take Benjamin! It is upon me that all these things have come!” 37 But Reuʹben said to his father: “You may put to death my own two sons if I do not bring him back to you. Give him over to my care, and I will return him to you.” 38 However, he said: “My son will not go down with you, because his brother is dead and he alone is left. If a fatal accident should befall him on the journey you would make, then you would certainly bring down my gray hairs to the Grave in grief.”
43 Now the famine was severe in the land. 2 So when they had finished eating the grain they had brought from Egypt, their father said to them: “Return and buy a little food for us.” 3 Then Judah said to him: “The man clearly warned us, ‘You must not see my face again unless your brother is with you.’ 4 If you send our brother with us, we will go down and buy food for you. 5 But if you do not send him, we will not go down, for the man said to us, ‘You must not see my face again unless your brother is with you.’” 6 And Israel asked: “Why did you have to bring this trouble on me by telling the man that you had another brother?” 7 They replied: “The man directly inquired concerning us and our relatives, saying, ‘Is your father still alive? Do you have another brother?’ and we told him these facts. How could we possibly know that he would say, ‘Bring your brother down’?”8 Judah then urged Israel his father: “Send the boy with me, and let us go on our way so that we may live and not die—we and you and our children. 9 I will be a guarantee for his safety. You may hold me responsible. If I fail to return him to you and present him to you, I will have sinned against you for all time. 10 But if we had not delayed, we could have been there and back twice by now.”11 So Israel their father said to them: “If it must be so, then do this: Take the finest products of the land in your bags and carry them down to the man as a gift: a little balsam, a little honey, labdanum, resinous bark, pistachio nuts, and almonds. 12 Take double the money with you; and also take back the money that was returned in the mouth of your bags. Maybe it was a mistake. 13 Take your brother and go, return to the man. 14 May God Almighty grant you pity from the man, so that he may release to you your other brother and Benjamin. But as for me, if I must be bereaved, I will be bereaved!”15 So the men took this gift, and they took double the money in their hand and Benjamin. Then they rose and went on their way down to Egypt and again stood before Joseph. 16 When Joseph saw Benjamin with them, he at once said to the man who was over his house: “Take the men to the house and slaughter animals and prepare the meal, for the men are to eat with me at noon.” 17 Immediately the man did just as Joseph had said, and he took them to Joseph’s house. 18 But the men became afraid when they were taken to Joseph’s house, and they began to say: “It is because of the money that was returned in our bags the last time that we are being brought here. Now they will attack us and make us slaves and take our donkeys!”19 So they approached the man who was over Joseph’s house and spoke to him at the entrance of the house. 20 They said: “Pardon us, my lord! We did come down the first time to buy food. 21 But when we arrived at our lodging place and began opening our bags, why, here was the money of each one in the mouth of his bag, our money in full weight. So we would like to return it personally. 22 And we have brought more money to buy food. We do not know who placed our money in our bags.” 23 Then he said: “It is all right. Do not be afraid. Your God and the God of your father put treasure in your bags. Your money came first to me.” After that he brought out Simʹe·on to them.24 Then the man brought them into Joseph’s house and gave them water for washing their feet, and he gave fodder for their donkeys. 25 And they prepared the gift for Joseph’s coming at noon, for they had heard that they were going to eat a meal there. 26 When Joseph went into the house, they brought their gift to him into the house and prostrated themselves to him to the ground. 27 After this he inquired about their welfare and said: “How is your aged father of whom you have spoken? Is he still alive?” 28 To this they said: “Your servant our father is well. He is still alive.” Then they bowed down and prostrated themselves.29 When he looked up and saw Benjamin his brother, the son of his mother, he said: “Is this your brother, the youngest one of whom you have spoken to me?” He added: “May God show you his favor, my son.” 30 Joseph then hurried out, because he was overcome with emotion for his brother, and he looked for a place to weep. So he went into a private room and gave way to tears there. 31 After that he washed his face and went out, now in control of himself, and he said: “Serve the meal.” 32 They served him by himself and them by themselves, and the Egyptians with him ate by themselves, for the Egyptians could not eat a meal with the Hebrews, because that is a detestable thing to the Egyptians.33 The brothers were seated before him, the firstborn according to his right as firstborn and the youngest according to his youth, and they kept looking at one another in amazement. 34 He kept sending portions of food from his table to theirs, but he increased Benjamin’s portion five times the size of the portions of all the others. So they continued banqueting and drinking with him to the full.
44 Later he commanded the man who was over his house: “Fill the bags of the men with as much food as they can carry, and place the money of each one in the mouth of his bag. 2 But you must place my cup, the silver cup, in the mouth of the bag of the youngest, along with the money for his grain.” So he did as Joseph had instructed.3 In the morning when it had become light, the men were sent away with their donkeys. 4 They had not gone far from the city when Joseph said to the man who was over his house: “Get up! Chase after the men! When you overtake them, say to them, ‘Why have you repaid bad for good? 5 Is not this what my master drinks from and uses to read omens expertly? It is a wicked thing you have done.’”6 So he overtook them and spoke these words to them. 7 But they said to him: “Why does my lord say such a thing? It is unthinkable that your servants would do anything like this. 8 Why, the money that we found in the mouth of our bags we brought back to you from the land of Caʹnaan. How, then, could we steal silver or gold from the house of your master? 9 If it is found with one of your slaves, let him die, and the rest of us will also become slaves to my master.” 10 So he said: “Let it be as you say: The one with whom it is found will become my slave, but the rest of you will be innocent.” 11 With that each one quickly lowered his bag to the ground and opened it. 12 He searched carefully, starting with the oldest and finishing with the youngest. Finally the cup was found in Benjamin’s bag.13 Then they ripped their garments apart, and each of them lifted his load back onto his donkey and returned to the city. 14 When Judah and his brothers went into Joseph’s house, he was still there; and they fell to the ground before him. 15 Joseph said to them: “What is this deed that you have done? Did you not know that a man like me can expertly read omens?” 16 At this Judah replied: “What can we say to my master? What can we speak? And how can we prove ourselves righteous? The true God has found out the error of your slaves. We are now slaves to my master, both we and the one in whose hand the cup was found!” 17 However, he said: “It is unthinkable for me to do this! The man in whose hand the cup was found is the one who will become a slave to me. As for the rest of you, go up in peace to your father.”18 Judah now approached him and said: “I beg you, my master, please let your slave speak a word in my master’s ears, and do not become angry with your slave, for you are like Pharʹaoh himself. 19 My master asked his slaves, ‘Do you have a father or a brother?’ 20 So we said to my master, ‘We do have an aged father and a child of his old age, the youngest. But his brother is dead, so he is the only remaining son of his mother, and his father loves him.’ 21 After that you said to your slaves, ‘Bring him down to me so that I may see him.’ 22 But we said to my master, ‘The boy is not able to leave his father. If he did leave him, his father would certainly die.’ 23 Then you said to your slaves, ‘Unless your youngest brother comes down with you, you may not see my face anymore.’24 “So we went up to your slave my father and told him the words of my master. 25 Later our father said, ‘Return and buy a little food for us.’ 26 But we said, ‘We are not able to go down. If our youngest brother is with us we will go down, for we cannot see the man’s face unless our youngest brother is with us.’ 27 Then your slave my father said to us, ‘You well know that my wife bore but two sons to me. 28 But one of them left me and I said: “He must surely have been torn to pieces!” and I have not seen him until now. 29 If you were to take this one also out of my sight and a fatal accident were to befall him, you would certainly bring down my gray hairs to the Grave with calamity.’30 “And now if I return to your slave my father without the boy along with us, since his own life is bound up with this one’s life, 31 then as soon as he sees that the boy is not there, he will die, and your slaves will indeed bring down the gray hairs of your slave our father to the Grave in grief. 32 Your slave gave a guarantee to my father for the boy, saying, ‘If I fail to bring him back to you, then I will have sinned against my father forever.’ 33 So now, please, let your slave stay instead of the boy as my master’s slave, in order that the boy may return with his brothers. 34 How can I return to my father without the boy along with me? I could not bear looking on when this calamity befalls my father!”
45 At this Joseph could no longer control himself before all his attendants. So he cried out: “Have everyone leave me!” No one else stayed with him while Joseph made himself known to his brothers.2 Then he began to weep so loudly that the Egyptians heard it and Pharʹaoh’s house heard it. 3 Finally Joseph said to his brothers: “I am Joseph. Is my father still alive?” But his brothers were unable to answer him at all, because they were astonished on account of him. 4 So Joseph said to his brothers: “Come close to me, please.” With that they came close to him.Then he said: “I am Joseph your brother, whom you sold into Egypt. 5 But now do not be upset and do not reproach one another because you sold me here; because God has sent me ahead of you for the preservation of life. 6 This is the second year of the famine in the land, and there are yet five years in which there will be no plowing or harvest. 7 But God sent me ahead of you in order to preserve for you a remnant on the earth and to keep you alive by a great deliverance. 8 So, then, it was not you who sent me here, but it was the true God, in order to appoint me as chief adviser to Pharʹaoh and lord for all his house and ruler over all the land of Egypt.9 “Return quickly to my father, and you must say to him, ‘This is what your son Joseph has said: “God has appointed me lord over all Egypt. Come down to me. Do not delay. 10 You must dwell in the land of Goʹshen, where you will be near me—you, your sons, your grandsons, your flocks, your herds, and everything you have. 11 I will supply you with food there, for there are yet five years of famine. Otherwise, you and your house and everything you have will come to poverty.”’ 12 You and my brother Benjamin can now see with your own eyes that I am really the one speaking to you. 13 So you must tell my father about all my glory in Egypt and everything you have seen. Now hurry and bring my father down here.”14 Then he embraced his brother Benjamin and gave way to weeping, and Benjamin wept with his arms around his neck. 15 And he kissed all his brothers and wept over them, and after that his brothers spoke with him.16 The news reached the house of Pharʹaoh: “Joseph’s brothers have come!” It was good in the eyes of Pharʹaoh and his servants. 17 So Pharʹaoh said to Joseph: “Tell your brothers, ‘Do this: Load your beasts of burden and go to the land of Caʹnaan, 18 and take your father and your households and come here to me. I will give you the good things of the land of Egypt, and you will eat the richest part of the land.’ 19 And you are commanded to tell them: ‘Do this: Take wagons from the land of Egypt for your children and your wives, and you must bring your father on one of them and come here. 20 Do not worry about your belongings, for the best of all the land of Egypt is yours.’”21 And the sons of Israel did so, and Joseph gave them wagons according to Pharʹaoh’s orders, and he gave them provisions for the journey. 22 To each of them he gave individual changes of clothing, but to Benjamin he gave 300 silver pieces and five changes of clothing. 23 And to his father he sent the following: ten donkeys carrying good things of Egypt and ten female donkeys carrying grain and bread and sustenance for his father for the journey. 24 So he sent his brothers off, and as they departed, he said to them: “Do not become upset with one another on the way.”25 Then they went up from Egypt and came into the land of Caʹnaan to their father Jacob. 26 Then they reported to him: “Joseph is still alive, and he is the ruler over all the land of Egypt!” But his heart grew numb because he did not believe them. 27 When they went on telling him all the words that Joseph had spoken to them and when he saw the wagons that Joseph had sent to carry him, the spirit of their father Jacob began to revive. 28 Israel exclaimed: “It is enough! My son Joseph is still alive! I must go and see him before I die!”
46 So Israel took all that he had and departed. When he arrived at Beʹer-sheʹba, he offered sacrifices to the God of his father Isaac. 2 Then God spoke to Israel in a vision by night and said: “Jacob, Jacob!” to which he said: “Here I am!” 3 He said: “I am the true God, the God of your father. Do not be afraid to go down to Egypt, for there I will make you into a great nation. 4 I myself will go down with you to Egypt, and I myself will also bring you back from there, and Joseph will lay his hand on your eyes.”5 After that Jacob departed from Beʹer-sheʹba, and the sons of Israel transported Jacob their father and their children and their wives in the wagons that Pharʹaoh had sent to transport him. 6 They took along their herds and their goods, which they had accumulated in the land of Caʹnaan. And so they came into Egypt, Jacob and all his offspring with him. 7 He brought with him into Egypt his sons and his grandsons, his daughters and his granddaughters—all his offspring.8 Now these are the names of Israel’s sons who came into Egypt, Jacob and his sons: Jacob’s firstborn was Reuʹben.9 The sons of Reuʹben were Haʹnoch, Palʹlu, Hezʹron, and Carʹmi.10 The sons of Simʹe·on were Jem·uʹel, Jaʹmin, Oʹhad, Jaʹchin, Zoʹhar, and Shaʹul the son of a Caʹnaan·ite woman.11 The sons of Leʹvi were Gerʹshon, Koʹhath, and Me·rarʹi.12 The sons of Judah were Er, Oʹnan, Sheʹlah, Peʹrez, and Zeʹrah. However, Er and Oʹnan died in the land of Caʹnaan.The sons of Peʹrez came to be Hezʹron and Haʹmul.13 The sons of Isʹsa·char were Toʹla, Puʹvah, Iob, and Shimʹron.14 The sons of Zebʹu·lun were Seʹred, Eʹlon, and Jahʹle·el.15 These are the sons of Leʹah, whom she bore to Jacob in Padʹdan-aʹram, together with his daughter Diʹnah. All his sons and his daughters numbered 33.16 The sons of Gad were Ziphʹi·on, Hagʹgi, Shuʹni, Ezʹbon, Eʹri, Ar·oʹdi, and A·reʹli.17 The sons of Ashʹer were Imʹnah, Ishʹvah, Ishʹvi, and Be·riʹah, and their sister was Seʹrah.The sons of Be·riʹah were Heʹber and Malʹchi·el.18 These are the sons of Zilʹpah, whom Laʹban gave to his daughter Leʹah. She bore these to Jacob: 16 persons in all.19 The sons of Jacob’s wife Rachel were Joseph and Benjamin.20 There were born to Joseph in the land of Egypt Ma·nasʹseh and Eʹphra·im, whom Asʹe·nath the daughter of Pot·iʹphe·ra the priest of On bore to him.21 The sons of Benjamin were Beʹla, Beʹcher, Ashʹbel, Geʹra, Naʹa·man, Eʹhi, Rosh, Mupʹpim, Hupʹpim, and Ard.22 These are the sons of Rachel who were born to Jacob: 14 persons in all.23 The son of Dan was Huʹshim.24 The sons of Naphʹta·li were Jahʹze·el, Guʹni, Jeʹzer, and Shilʹlem.25 These are the sons of Bilʹhah, whom Laʹban gave to his daughter Rachel. She bore these to Jacob: seven persons in all.26 All those who descended from Jacob and went into Egypt with him, aside from the wives of Jacob’s sons, were 66. 27 Joseph’s sons who were born to him in Egypt were two. All the people of the house of Jacob who came into Egypt were 70.28 Jacob sent Judah ahead to tell Joseph that he was on the way to Goʹshen. When they came into the land of Goʹshen, 29 Joseph had his chariot prepared and went up to meet Israel his father at Goʹshen. When he presented himself to him, he at once embraced him and wept for some time. 30 Then Israel said to Joseph: “Now I am ready to die; I have seen your face and know that you are still alive.”31 Joseph then said to his brothers and to his father’s household: “Let me go up and report to Pharʹaoh and tell him, ‘My brothers and my father’s household who were in the land of Caʹnaan have come here to me. 32 The men are shepherds, and they raise livestock, and they have brought their flocks and their herds and all that they have.’ 33 When Pharʹaoh calls you and asks, ‘What is your occupation?’ 34 you must say, ‘Your servants have raised livestock from our youth until now, both we and our forefathers,’ so that you may dwell in the land of Goʹshen, for every herder of sheep is detestable to the Egyptians.”
47 So Joseph went and reported to Pharʹaoh: “My father and my brothers and their flocks and their herds and all that they possess have come from the land of Caʹnaan, and they are in the land of Goʹshen.” 2 He took five of his brothers and presented them to Pharʹaoh.3 Pharʹaoh said to his brothers: “What is your occupation?” They replied to Pharʹaoh: “Your servants are herders of sheep, both we and our forefathers.” 4 Then they said to Pharʹaoh: “We have come to reside as foreigners in the land because there are no pastures for the flock of your servants, for the famine is severe in the land of Caʹnaan. So please let your servants dwell in the land of Goʹshen.” 5 At that Pharʹaoh said to Joseph: “Your father and your brothers have come here to you. 6 The land of Egypt is at your disposal. Have your father and your brothers dwell in the very best part of the land. Let them dwell in the land of Goʹshen, and if you know of any capable men among them, put them in charge of my livestock.”7 Then Joseph brought in Jacob his father and presented him to Pharʹaoh, and Jacob blessed Pharʹaoh. 8 Pharʹaoh asked Jacob: “How old are you?” 9 Jacob said to Pharʹaoh: “The years of my wanderings are 130. Few and distressing the years of my life have been, and they are not as long as the years of the lives of my forefathers during their wanderings.” 10 After that Jacob blessed Pharʹaoh and went out from before him.11 So Joseph settled his father and his brothers, and he gave them a possession in the land of Egypt, in the very best part of the land, in the land of Ramʹe·ses, just as Pharʹaoh had commanded. 12 And Joseph kept supplying his father and his brothers and the entire household of his father with food according to the number of their children.13 Now there was no food in all the land, because the famine was very severe, and the land of Egypt and the land of Caʹnaan became exhausted as a result of the famine. 14 Joseph was collecting all the money that was to be found in the land of Egypt and in the land of Caʹnaan for the grain that people were buying, and Joseph kept bringing the money into Pharʹaoh’s house. 15 In time the money from the land of Egypt and the land of Caʹnaan was spent, and all the Egyptians began coming to Joseph, saying: “Give us food! Why should we die before your very eyes because our money has run out?” 16 Then Joseph said: “If your money has run out, hand over your livestock, and I will give you food in exchange for your livestock.” 17 So they began bringing their livestock to Joseph, and Joseph kept giving them food in exchange for their horses, the livestock of the flock and of the herd, and the donkeys, and he kept providing them with food in exchange for all their livestock during that year.18 When that year came to its close, they began coming to him the next year and saying: “We will not hide from my lord that the money and the stock of domestic animals have already been given to my lord. We have nothing left for my lord but our bodies and our land. 19 Why should we die before your eyes, both we and our land? Buy us and our land in exchange for food, and we together with our land will become slaves to Pharʹaoh. Give us seed so that we may live and not die and that our land may not become desolate.” 20 Joseph then bought all the land of the Egyptians for Pharʹaoh because every Egyptian sold his field, for the famine was very severe; and the land became Pharʹaoh’s.21 Then he moved the people into cities, from one end of the territory of Egypt to its other end. 22 Only the land of the priests he did not buy, because the rations for the priests were from Pharʹaoh and they lived on their rations that Pharʹaoh gave them. That is why they did not sell their land. 23 Then Joseph said to the people: “See, I have today bought you and your land for Pharʹaoh. Here is seed for you, and you must sow the land with it. 24 When it produces, give a fifth to Pharʹaoh, but four parts will be yours as seed for the field and as food for you and for those in your houses and for your children to eat.” 25 So they said: “You have preserved our lives. Let us find favor in the eyes of my lord, and we will become slaves to Pharʹaoh.” 26 Then Joseph made it a decree, which is valid until today over the land of Egypt, that a fifth belongs to Pharʹaoh. It was only the land of the priests that did not become Pharʹaoh’s.27 Israel continued to dwell in the land of Egypt, in the land of Goʹshen, and they settled in it and were fruitful and increased greatly. 28 And Jacob lived on in the land of Egypt for 17 years, so that the days of Jacob’s life came to be 147 years.29 The time was approaching for Israel to die, so he called his son Joseph and said: “If, now, I have found favor in your eyes, place your hand, please, under my thigh, and show loyal love and faithfulness to me. Please, do not bury me in Egypt. 30 When I die, you must carry me out of Egypt and bury me in the grave of my forefathers.” Accordingly, he said: “I will do just as you say.” 31 Then he said: “Swear to me.” So he swore to him. At that Israel bowed down at the head of his bed.
48 After these things, Joseph was told: “Look, your father is getting weak.” At that he took his two sons Ma·nasʹseh and Eʹphra·im with him. 2 Then Jacob was told: “Here your son Joseph has come to you.” So Israel gathered his strength and sat up on his bed. 3 And Jacob said to Joseph:“God Almighty appeared to me at Luz in the land of Caʹnaan and blessed me. 4 And he said to me, ‘I am making you fruitful, and I will make you many, and I will transform you into a congregation of peoples, and I will give this land to your offspring after you as a lasting possession.’ 5 Now your two sons who were born to you in the land of Egypt before I came to you in Egypt are mine. Eʹphra·im and Ma·nasʹseh will become mine just as Reuʹben and Simʹe·on are mine. 6 But the children born to you after them will become yours. They will be called by the name of their brothers in their inheritance. 7 As for me, when I was coming from Padʹdan, Rachel died alongside me in the land of Caʹnaan, while there was yet a good stretch of land before coming to Ephʹrath. So I buried her there on the way to Ephʹrath, that is, Bethʹle·hem.”8 Then Israel saw Joseph’s sons and asked: “Who are these?” 9 So Joseph said to his father: “They are my sons whom God has given me in this place.” At this he said: “Bring them to me, please, so that I may bless them.” 10 Now the eyes of Israel were failing from age, and he was unable to see. So Joseph brought them close to him, and he kissed them and embraced them. 11 Israel said to Joseph: “I never imagined I would see your face, but here God has also let me see your offspring.” 12 Joseph then removed them from Israel’s knees, and he bowed down with his face to the ground.13 Joseph now took the two of them, Eʹphra·im with his right hand to Israel’s left and Ma·nasʹseh with his left hand to Israel’s right, and brought them close to him. 14 However, Israel put out his right hand and placed it on Eʹphra·im’s head, although he was the younger, and he placed his left hand on Ma·nasʹseh’s head. He purposely laid his hands this way, since Ma·nasʹseh was the firstborn. 15 Then he blessed Joseph and said:“The true God before whom my fathers Abraham and Isaac walked,The true God who has been shepherding me during all my life until this day,16 The angel who has been recovering me from all calamity, bless the boys.Let my name be called upon them and the name of my fathers, Abraham and Isaac,Let them increase to a multitude in the earth.”17 When Joseph saw that his father kept his right hand placed on Eʹphra·im’s head, it was displeasing to him, so he tried to take hold of his father’s hand to move it from Eʹphra·im’s head to Ma·nasʹseh’s head. 18 Joseph said to his father: “Not so, my father, because this is the firstborn. Put your right hand on his head.” 19 But his father kept refusing and said: “I know it, my son, I know it. He too will become a people, and he too will become great. Nevertheless, his younger brother will become greater than he will, and his offspring will become the full equivalent of nations.” 20 So he continued to bless them on that day, saying:“Let Israel mention you when they pronounce blessings, saying,‘May God make you like Eʹphra·im and like Ma·nasʹseh.’”Thus he kept putting Eʹphra·im before Ma·nasʹseh.21 Then Israel said to Joseph: “Look, I am dying, but God will certainly continue with you and return you to the land of your forefathers. 22 As for me, I do give you one portion of land more than to your brothers, which I took from the hand of the Amʹor·ites with my sword and my bow.”
49 And Jacob called his sons and said: “Gather yourselves together that I may tell you what will happen to you in the final part of the days. 2 Assemble yourselves and listen, you sons of Jacob, yes, listen to Israel your father.3 “Reuʹben, you are my firstborn, my vigor and the beginning of my procreative power, the excellence of dignity and the excellence of strength. 4 With recklessness like turbulent waters, you will not excel, because you have gone up to your father’s bed. At that time you defiled my bed. He actually went on to it!5 “Simʹe·on and Leʹvi are brothers. Instruments of violence are their slaughter weapons. 6 Into their company do not come, O my soul. With their assembly do not join, O my honor, because in their anger they killed men, and for their pleasure they hamstrung bulls. 7 Cursed be their anger, because it is cruel, and their fury, because it is harsh. Let me disperse them in Jacob, and let me scatter them in Israel.8 “As for you, Judah, your brothers will praise you. Your hand will be on the neck of your enemies. The sons of your father will bow down before you. 9 Judah is a lion cub. From the prey, my son, you will certainly go up. He has crouched down and stretched himself out like a lion, and like a lion, who dares rouse him? 10 The scepter will not depart from Judah, neither the commander’s staff from between his feet, until Shiʹloh comes, and to him the obedience of the peoples will belong. 11 Tying his donkey to a vine and his donkey’s colt to a choice vine, he will wash his clothing in wine and his garment in the blood of grapes. 12 Dark red are his eyes from wine, and his teeth are white from milk.13 “Zebʹu·lun will reside by the seashore, by the shore where the ships lie anchored, and his remote border will be toward Siʹdon.14 “Isʹsa·char is a strong-boned donkey, lying down between the two saddlebags. 15 And he will see that the resting-place is good and that the land is pleasant. He will bend his shoulder to bear the burden and will submit to forced labor.16 “Dan will judge his people as one of the tribes of Israel. 17 Let Dan be a serpent by the roadside, a horned snake beside the path, that bites the heels of the horse so that its rider falls backward. 18 I will wait for salvation from you, O Jehovah.19 “As for Gad, a marauder band will raid him, but he will raid at their heels.20 “Ashʹer’s bread will be abundant, and he will provide food fit for a king.21 “Naphʹta·li is a slender doe. He is speaking words of elegance.22 “Joseph is the offshoot of a fruitful tree, a fruitful tree by a spring, whose branches extend over the wall. 23 But the archers kept harassing him and shot at him and kept harboring animosity against him. 24 And yet his bow remained in place, and his hands stayed strong and agile. This was from the hands of the powerful one of Jacob, from the shepherd, the stone of Israel. 25 He is from the God of your father, and he will help you, and he is with the Almighty, and he will bless you with the blessings of the heavens above, with the blessings of the deep below, with the blessings of the breasts and womb. 26 The blessings of your father will be superior to the blessings of the eternal mountains, to the desirable things of the enduring hills. They will continue upon the head of Joseph, upon the crown of the head of the one singled out from his brothers.27 “Benjamin will keep on tearing like a wolf. In the morning he will eat the prey, and in the evening he will divide spoil.”28 All of these are the 12 tribes of Israel, and this is what their father said to them when he was blessing them. He gave each of them an appropriate blessing.29 After that he gave these commands to them: “I am being gathered to my people. Bury me with my fathers in the cave that is in the field of Eʹphron the Hitʹtite, 30 the cave in the field of Mach·peʹlah in front of Mamʹre in the land of Caʹnaan, the field that Abraham purchased from Eʹphron the Hitʹtite as a property for a burial place. 31 There they buried Abraham and his wife Sarah. There they buried Isaac and his wife Re·bekʹah, and there I buried Leʹah. 32 The field and the cave that is in it were purchased from the sons of Heth.”33 Thus Jacob finished giving these instructions to his sons. Then he drew his feet up onto the bed and breathed his last and was gathered to his people.
5 This is the book of Adam’s history. In the day that God created Adam, he made him in the likeness of God. 2 Male and female he created them. On the day they were created, he blessed them and named them Man.3 Adam lived for 130 years and then became father to a son in his likeness, in his image, and he named him Seth. 4 After becoming father to Seth, Adam lived for 800 years. And he became father to sons and daughters. 5 So all the days of Adam’s life amounted to 930 years, and then he died.6 Seth lived for 105 years and then became father to Eʹnosh. 7 After becoming father to Eʹnosh, Seth lived for 807 years. And he became father to sons and daughters. 8 So all the days of Seth amounted to 912 years, and then he died.9 Eʹnosh lived for 90 years and then became father to Keʹnan. 10 After becoming father to Keʹnan, Eʹnosh lived for 815 years. And he became father to sons and daughters. 11 So all the days of Eʹnosh amounted to 905 years, and then he died.12 Keʹnan lived for 70 years and then became father to Ma·halʹa·lel. 13 After becoming father to Ma·halʹa·lel, Keʹnan lived for 840 years. And he became father to sons and daughters. 14 So all the days of Keʹnan amounted to 910 years, and then he died.15 Ma·halʹa·lel lived for 65 years and then became father to Jaʹred. 16 After becoming father to Jaʹred, Ma·halʹa·lel lived for 830 years. And he became father to sons and daughters. 17 So all the days of Ma·halʹa·lel amounted to 895 years, and then he died.18 Jaʹred lived for 162 years and then became father to Eʹnoch. 19 After becoming father to Eʹnoch, Jaʹred lived for 800 years. And he became father to sons and daughters. 20 So all the days of Jaʹred amounted to 962 years, and then he died.21 Eʹnoch lived for 65 years and then became father to Me·thuʹse·lah. 22 After becoming father to Me·thuʹse·lah, Eʹnoch continued to walk with the true God for 300 years. And he became father to sons and daughters. 23 So all the days of Eʹnoch amounted to 365 years. 24 Eʹnoch kept walking with the true God. Then he was no more, for God took him.25 Me·thuʹse·lah lived for 187 years and then became father to Laʹmech. 26 After becoming father to Laʹmech, Me·thuʹse·lah lived for 782 years. And he became father to sons and daughters. 27 So all the days of Me·thuʹse·lah amounted to 969 years, and then he died.28 Laʹmech lived for 182 years and then became father to a son. 29 He named him Noah, saying: “This one will bring us comfort from our labor and from the painful toil of our hands because of the ground that Jehovah has cursed.” 30 After becoming father to Noah, Laʹmech lived for 595 years. And he became father to sons and daughters. 31 So all the days of Laʹmech amounted to 777 years, and then he died.32 After Noah reached 500 years of age, he became father to Shem, Ham, and Jaʹpheth.
50 Joseph then threw himself on his father and wept over him and kissed him. 2 After that Joseph commanded his servants, the physicians, to embalm his father. So the physicians embalmed Israel, 3 and they took the full 40 days for him, for this is the full period for the embalming, and the Egyptians continued to shed tears for him 70 days.4 When the days of mourning for him passed, Joseph spoke to Pharʹaoh’s court, saying: “If I have found favor in your eyes, give this message to Pharʹaoh: 5 ‘My father made me swear, saying: “Look! I am dying. You are to bury me in my burial place, which I have excavated in the land of Caʹnaan.” Please, let me go up and bury my father, after which I will return.’” 6 Pharʹaoh replied: “Go and bury your father just as he made you swear.”7 So Joseph went up to bury his father, and all of Pharʹaoh’s servants went with him, the elders of his court and all the elders of the land of Egypt 8 and all of Joseph’s household and his brothers and the household of his father. Only their little children and their flocks and their herds they left in the land of Goʹshen. 9 Chariots and horsemen also went up with him, and the camp was very numerous. 10 Then they came to the threshing floor of Aʹtad, which is in the region of the Jordan, and there they carried on a very great and bitter mourning, and he kept mourning for his father seven days. 11 The inhabitants of the land, the Caʹnaan·ites, saw them mourning at the threshing floor of Aʹtad, and they exclaimed: “This is a great mourning for the Egyptians!” That is why it was named Aʹbel-mizʹra·im, which is in the region of the Jordan.12 So his sons did for him exactly as he had instructed them. 13 His sons carried him into the land of Caʹnaan and buried him in the cave of the field of Mach·peʹlah, the field in front of Mamʹre that Abraham had purchased from Eʹphron the Hitʹtite as property for a burial place. 14 After he buried his father, Joseph returned to Egypt with his brothers and all those who had gone with him to bury his father.15 When Joseph’s brothers saw that their father was dead, they said: “It may be that Joseph is harboring animosity against us and that he will repay us for all the evil that we did to him.” 16 So they sent a message to Joseph in these words: “Your father gave this command before his death: 17 ‘This is what you are to say to Joseph: “I beg you, please pardon the transgression of your brothers and the sin they committed in bringing such harm to you.”’ Now, please, pardon the transgression of the servants of your father’s God.” And Joseph wept when they spoke to him. 18 Then his brothers also came and fell down before him and said: “Here we are as slaves to you!” 19 Joseph said to them: “Do not be afraid. Am I in the place of God? 20 Although you meant to harm me, God intended it to turn out well and to preserve many people alive, as he is doing today. 21 So now do not be afraid. I will keep supplying you and your little children with food.” Thus he comforted them and spoke reassuringly to them.22 And Joseph continued to dwell in Egypt, he and the household of his father, and Joseph lived for 110 years. 23 Joseph saw the third generation of Eʹphra·im’s sons, also the sons of Maʹchir, Ma·nasʹseh’s son. They were born upon Joseph’s knees. 24 At length Joseph said to his brothers: “I am dying, but God will without fail turn his attention to you, and he will certainly bring you up out of this land to the land about which he swore to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob.” 25 So Joseph made the sons of Israel swear, saying: “God will without fail turn his attention to you. You must take my bones up out of here.” 26 And Joseph died at the age of 110, and they had him embalmed, and he was put in a coffin in Egypt.
6 Now when men started to grow in number on the surface of the ground and daughters were born to them, 2 the sons of the true God began to notice that the daughters of men were beautiful. So they began taking as wives all whom they chose. 3 Then Jehovah said: “My spirit will not tolerate man indefinitely, because he is only flesh. Accordingly, his days will amount to 120 years.”4 The Nephʹi·lim were on the earth in those days and afterward. During that time the sons of the true God continued to have relations with the daughters of men, and these bore sons to them. They were the mighty ones of old times, the men of fame.5 Consequently, Jehovah saw that man’s wickedness was great on the earth and that every inclination of the thoughts of his heart was only bad all the time. 6 Jehovah regretted that he had made men on the earth, and his heart was saddened. 7 So Jehovah said: “I am going to wipe men whom I have created off the surface of the ground, man together with domestic animals, creeping animals, and flying creatures of the heavens, for I regret that I have made them.” 8 But Noah found favor in the eyes of Jehovah.9 This is the history of Noah.Noah was a righteous man. He proved himself faultless among his contemporaries. Noah walked with the true God. 10 In time Noah became father to three sons, Shem, Ham, and Jaʹpheth. 11 But the earth had become ruined in the sight of the true God, and the earth was filled with violence. 12 Yes, God looked upon the earth, and it was ruined; all flesh had ruined its way on the earth.13 After that God said to Noah: “I have decided to put an end to all flesh, because the earth is full of violence on account of them, so I am bringing them to ruin together with the earth. 14 Make for yourself an ark from resinous wood. You will make compartments in the ark and cover it with tar inside and outside. 15 This is how you will make it: The ark should be 300 cubits long, 50 cubits wide, and 30 cubits high. 16 You will make a window for light for the ark, one cubit from the top. You should put the entrance of the ark in its side and make it with a lower deck, a second deck, and a third deck.17 “As for me, I am going to bring floodwaters upon the earth to destroy from under the heavens all flesh that has the breath of life. Everything on the earth will perish. 18 And I am establishing my covenant with you, and you must go into the ark, you, your sons, your wife, and your sons’ wives with you. 19 And bring into the ark two of every sort of living creature in order to preserve them alive with you, a male and a female; 20 of the flying creatures according to their kinds, the domestic animals according to their kinds, and all creeping animals of the ground according to their kinds, two of each will go in there to you to preserve them alive. 21 For your part, you are to collect and take with you every kind of food to eat, to serve as food for you and for the animals.”22 And Noah did according to all that God had commanded him. He did just so.
7 After that Jehovah said to Noah: “Go into the ark, you and all your household, because you are the one I have found to be righteous before me among this generation. 2 You must take with you every kind of clean animal by sevens, the male and its mate; and of every animal that is not clean just two, the male and its mate; 3 also of the flying creatures of the sky by sevens, male and female, to preserve their offspring alive over all the earth. 4 For in just seven days, I will make it rain on the earth for 40 days and 40 nights, and I will wipe from the surface of the ground every living thing that I have made.” 5 Then Noah did everything that Jehovah had commanded him.6 Noah was 600 years old when the floodwaters came upon the earth. 7 So Noah, along with his sons, his wife, and his sons’ wives, went into the ark ahead of the floodwaters. 8 Of every clean animal and of every animal that is not clean and of the flying creatures and of everything that moves on the ground, 9 they went inside the ark to Noah by twos, male and female, just as God had commanded Noah. 10 And seven days later the floodwaters came upon the earth.11 In the 600th year of Noah’s life, in the second month, on the 17th day of the month, on that day all the springs of the vast watery deep burst open and the floodgates of the heavens were opened. 12 And the rain poured down on the earth for 40 days and 40 nights. 13 On that very day, Noah went into the ark along with his sons, Shem, Ham, and Jaʹpheth, and his wife and the three wives of his sons. 14 They went in with every wild animal according to its kind, and every domestic animal according to its kind, and every creeping animal of the earth according to its kind, and every flying creature according to its kind, every bird, every winged creature. 15 They kept going to Noah inside the ark, two by two, of every sort of flesh that has the breath of life. 16 So they went in, male and female of every sort of flesh, just as God had commanded him. After that Jehovah shut the door behind him.17 The flooding continued for 40 days on the earth, and the waters kept increasing and began carrying the ark, and it was floating high above the earth. 18 The waters became overwhelming and kept increasing greatly upon the earth, but the ark floated on the surface of the waters. 19 The waters overwhelmed the earth so greatly that all the tall mountains under the whole heavens were covered. 20 The waters rose up to 15 cubits above the mountains.21 So all living creatures that were moving on the earth perished—the flying creatures, the domestic animals, the wild animals, the swarming creatures, and all mankind. 22 Everything on dry land that had the breath of life in its nostrils died. 23 So He wiped every living thing from the surface of the earth, including man, animals, creeping animals, and the flying creatures of the sky. They were all wiped off the earth; only Noah and those with him in the ark survived. 24 And the waters continued overwhelming the earth for 150 days.
8 But God gave attention to Noah and to all the wild animals and domestic animals that were with him in the ark, and God caused a wind to blow over the earth, and the waters began to subside. 2 The springs of the watery deep and the floodgates of the heavens were stopped up, so the rain from the heavens stopped falling. 3 Then the waters began to recede progressively from the earth. By the end of 150 days, the waters had subsided. 4 In the seventh month, on the 17th day of the month, the ark came to rest on the mountains of Arʹa·rat. 5 And the waters were steadily decreasing until the tenth month. In the tenth month, on the first of the month, the tops of the mountains appeared.6 So at the end of 40 days, Noah opened the window that he had made in the ark 7 and sent out a raven; it continued flying outside and returning, until the waters dried off the earth.8 Later he sent out a dove to see whether the waters had receded from the surface of the ground. 9 The dove did not find any resting-place to perch, so it returned to him into the ark because the waters were still covering the surface of the whole earth. So he reached his hand out and brought it inside the ark. 10 He waited seven more days, and once again he sent out the dove from the ark. 11 When the dove came to him toward evening, he saw that there was a freshly plucked olive leaf in its bill! So Noah knew that the waters had receded from the earth. 12 He waited still another seven days. Then he sent out the dove, but it did not return to him anymore.13 Now in the 601st year, in the first month, on the first day of the month, the waters had drained from the earth; and Noah removed the covering of the ark and saw that the surface of the ground was drying. 14 In the second month, on the 27th day of the month, the earth had dried off.15 God now said to Noah: 16 “Go out of the ark, you, your wife, your sons, and your sons’ wives. 17 Bring out with you all the living creatures of every sort of flesh, of the flying creatures and of the animals and of all the creeping animals of the earth, that they may multiply on the earth and be fruitful and become many on the earth.”18 So Noah went out, together with his sons, his wife, and his sons’ wives. 19 Every living creature, every creeping animal and every flying creature, everything that moves on the earth, went out of the ark by families. 20 Then Noah built an altar to Jehovah and took some of all the clean animals and of all the clean flying creatures and offered burnt offerings on the altar. 21 And Jehovah began to smell a pleasing aroma. So Jehovah said in his heart: “Never again will I curse the ground on man’s account, for the inclination of the heart of man is bad from his youth up; and never again will I strike down every living thing as I have done. 22 From now on, the earth will never cease to have seed-sowing and harvest, cold and heat, summer and winter, and day and night.”
9 God went on to bless Noah and his sons and to say to them: “Be fruitful and become many and fill the earth. 2 A fear of you and a terror of you will continue upon every living creature of the earth and upon every flying creature of the heavens, upon everything that moves on the ground and upon all the fish of the sea. They are now given into your hand. 3 Every moving animal that is alive may serve as food for you. Just as I gave you the green vegetation, I give them all to you. 4 Only flesh with its life—its blood—you must not eat. 5 Besides that, I will demand an accounting for your lifeblood. I will demand an accounting from every living creature; and from each man I will demand an accounting for the life of his brother. 6 Anyone shedding man’s blood, by man will his own blood be shed, for in God’s image He made man. 7 As for you, be fruitful and become many, and increase abundantly on the earth and multiply.”8 Then God said to Noah and to his sons with him: 9 “I am now establishing my covenant with you and with your offspring after you, 10 and with every living creature that is with you, the birds, the animals, and all the living creatures of the earth with you, all those that came out of the ark—every living creature of the earth. 11 Yes, I establish my covenant with you: Never again will all flesh be destroyed by the waters of a flood, and never again will a flood bring the earth to ruin.”12 And God added: “This is the sign of the covenant that I am making between me and you and every living creature that is with you, for all future generations. 13 I put my rainbow in the cloud, and it will serve as a sign of the covenant between me and the earth. 14 Whenever I bring a cloud over the earth, then the rainbow will certainly appear in the cloud. 15 And I will certainly remember my covenant that I made between me and you and every living creature of every kind; and never again will the waters become a flood to destroy all flesh. 16 And the rainbow will occur in the cloud, and I will certainly see it and remember the everlasting covenant between God and every living creature of every kind on the earth.”17 God repeated to Noah: “This is the sign of the covenant that I establish between me and all flesh that is on the earth.”18 Noah’s sons who came out of the ark were Shem, Ham, and Jaʹpheth. Ham later became the father of Caʹnaan. 19 These three were Noah’s sons, and all the earth’s population came from them and spread abroad.20 Now Noah started off as a farmer, and he planted a vineyard. 21 When he drank of the wine, he became intoxicated, and he uncovered himself inside his tent. 22 Ham, the father of Caʹnaan, saw his father’s nakedness, and he told his two brothers outside. 23 So Shem and Jaʹpheth took a garment and put it upon both their shoulders and walked in backward. Thus they covered their father’s nakedness while their faces were turned away, and they did not see their father’s nakedness.24 When Noah woke up from his wine and learned what his youngest son had done to him, 25 he said:“Cursed be Caʹnaan.Let him become the lowest slave to his brothers.”26 And he added:“Praised be Jehovah, the God of Shem,And let Caʹnaan become a slave to him.27 Let God grant ample space to Jaʹpheth,And let him reside in the tents of Shem.Let Caʹnaan become a slave to him also.”28 Noah continued to live for 350 years after the Flood. 29 So all the days of Noah amounted to 950 years, and he died.
1 In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth.2 Now the earth was formless and desolate, and there was darkness upon the surface of the watery deep, and God’s active force was moving about over the surface of the waters.3 And God said: “Let there be light.” Then there was light. 4 After that God saw that the light was good, and God began to divide the light from the darkness. 5 God called the light Day, but the darkness he called Night. And there was evening and there was morning, a first day.6 Then God said: “Let there be an expanse between the waters, and let there be a division between the waters and the waters.” 7 Then God went on to make the expanse and divided the waters beneath the expanse from the waters above the expanse. And it was so. 8 God called the expanse Heaven. And there was evening and there was morning, a second day.9 Then God said: “Let the waters under the heavens be collected together into one place, and let the dry land appear.” And it was so. 10 God called the dry land Earth, but the collecting of the waters, he called Seas. And God saw that it was good. 11 Then God said: “Let the earth cause grass to sprout, seed-bearing plants and fruit trees according to their kinds, yielding fruit along with seed on the earth.” And it was so. 12 And the earth began to produce grass, seed-bearing plants and trees yielding fruit along with seed, according to their kinds. Then God saw that it was good. 13 And there was evening and there was morning, a third day.14 Then God said: “Let there be luminaries in the expanse of the heavens to make a division between the day and the night, and they will serve as signs for seasons and for days and years. 15 They will serve as luminaries in the expanse of the heavens to shine upon the earth.” And it was so. 16 And God went on to make the two great luminaries, the greater luminary for dominating the day and the lesser luminary for dominating the night, and also the stars. 17 Thus God put them in the expanse of the heavens to shine upon the earth 18 and to dominate by day and by night and to make a division between the light and the darkness. Then God saw that it was good. 19 And there was evening and there was morning, a fourth day.20 Then God said: “Let the waters swarm with living creatures, and let flying creatures fly above the earth across the expanse of the heavens.” 21 And God created the great sea creatures and all living creatures that move and swarm in the waters according to their kinds and every winged flying creature according to its kind. And God saw that it was good. 22 With that God blessed them, saying: “Be fruitful and become many and fill the waters of the sea, and let the flying creatures become many in the earth.” 23 And there was evening and there was morning, a fifth day.24 Then God said: “Let the earth bring forth living creatures according to their kinds, domestic animals and creeping animals and wild animals of the earth according to their kinds.” And it was so. 25 And God went on to make the wild animals of the earth according to their kinds and the domestic animals according to their kinds and all the creeping animals of the ground according to their kinds. And God saw that it was good.26 Then God said: “Let us make man in our image, according to our likeness, and let them have in subjection the fish of the sea and the flying creatures of the heavens and the domestic animals and all the earth and every creeping animal that is moving on the earth.” 27 And God went on to create the man in his image, in God’s image he created him; male and female he created them. 28 Further, God blessed them, and God said to them: “Be fruitful and become many, fill the earth and subdue it, and have in subjection the fish of the sea and the flying creatures of the heavens and every living creature that is moving on the earth.”29 Then God said: “Here I have given to you every seed-bearing plant that is on the entire earth and every tree with seed-bearing fruit. Let them serve as food for you. 30 And to every wild animal of the earth and to every flying creature of the heavens and to everything moving on the earth in which there is life, I have given all green vegetation for food.” And it was so.31 After that God saw everything he had made, and look! it was very good. And there was evening and there was morning, a sixth day.
10 Then Jehovah said to Moses: “Go in to Pharʹaoh, for I have allowed his heart and the hearts of his servants to become unresponsive, so that I may display these signs of mine right before him, 2 and in order that you may declare to your sons and your grandsons how severely I have dealt with Egypt and what signs I have performed among them; and you will certainly know that I am Jehovah.”3 So Moses and Aaron went in to Pharʹaoh and said to him: “This is what Jehovah the God of the Hebrews has said, ‘How long will you refuse to submit to me? Send my people away so that they may serve me. 4 For if you keep refusing to send my people away, here I am bringing locusts within your boundaries tomorrow. 5 And they will cover the surface of the earth, and it will not be possible to see the ground. They will eat up what escaped the hail and was left for you, and they will eat all your trees that are growing in the field. 6 They will fill your houses, the houses of all your servants, and the houses of all Egypt to an extent that your fathers and your grandfathers never saw from the time they have been in this land until today.’” With that he turned and went out from Pharʹaoh.7 Then Pharʹaoh’s servants said to him: “How long will this man continue to menace us? Send the men away so that they may serve Jehovah their God. Do you not yet realize that Egypt has been ruined?” 8 So Moses and Aaron were brought back to Pharʹaoh, and he said to them: “Go, serve Jehovah your God. But just who will be going?” 9 Then Moses said: “We will go with our young people, our old people, our sons, our daughters, our sheep, and our cattle, because we will hold a festival to Jehovah.” 10 He said to them: “If I ever send you and your children away, then Jehovah is indeed with you! It is clear that you intend to do something evil. 11 No! Only your men may go and serve Jehovah, for that is what you requested.” With that they were driven out from before Pharʹaoh.12 Jehovah now said to Moses: “Stretch out your hand over the land of Egypt for the locusts, so that they may come up over the land of Egypt and eat up all the vegetation of the land, everything that the hail has let remain.” 13 At once Moses stretched out his rod over the land of Egypt, and Jehovah caused an east wind to blow on the land all that day and all night. The morning came, and the east wind brought the locusts. 14 And the locusts came up over all the land of Egypt and settled down on the whole territory of Egypt. It was extremely severe; never before had there been so many locusts, nor would there ever be so many again. 15 They covered the surface of the entire land, and the land grew dark with them; they devoured all the vegetation of the land and all the fruit of the trees that the hail had left; nothing green was left on the trees or on the vegetation of the field in all the land of Egypt.16 So Pharʹaoh quickly called Moses and Aaron and said: “I have sinned against Jehovah your God and against you. 17 Now, please, pardon my sin just this once, and plead with Jehovah your God that he just remove this deadly plague from upon me.” 18 So he went out from Pharʹaoh and pleaded with Jehovah. 19 Then Jehovah caused the wind to shift, and it became a very stiff west wind, and it carried the locusts away and drove them into the Red Sea. Not a single locust remained in all the territory of Egypt. 20 However, Jehovah allowed Pharʹaoh’s heart to become obstinate, and he did not send the Israelites away.21 Jehovah then said to Moses: “Stretch out your hand toward the heavens so that there may be darkness over the land of Egypt, a darkness so thick that it can be felt.” 22 Moses immediately stretched out his hand toward the heavens, and there was a dense darkness in all the land of Egypt for three days. 23 They did not see one another, and none of them got up from where they were for three days; but all the Israelites had light in their dwellings. 24 Pharʹaoh then called Moses and said: “Go, serve Jehovah. Only your sheep and your cattle will remain behind. Even your children may go with you.” 25 But Moses said: “You yourself will also provide us with sacrifices and burnt offerings, and we will offer them to Jehovah our God. 26 Our livestock will also go with us. Not an animal will be allowed to remain, because we will be using some of them to worship Jehovah our God, and we do not know what we will offer in worship to Jehovah until we arrive there.” 27 So Jehovah allowed Pharʹaoh’s heart to become obstinate, and he did not consent to send them away. 28 Pharʹaoh said to him: “Get out of my sight! Make sure that you do not try to see my face again, for on the day you see my face, you will die.” 29 To this Moses said: “Just as you have spoken, I will not try to see your face again.”
11 Then Jehovah said to Moses: “One more plague I am going to bring upon Pharʹaoh and Egypt. After that he will send you away from here. When he does send you away, he will literally drive you out of here. 2 Now tell the people that all the men and women should ask their neighbor for articles of silver and of gold.” 3 And Jehovah gave the people favor in the eyes of the Egyptians. Moreover, Moses himself had become highly esteemed in the land of Egypt among Pharʹaoh’s servants and among the people.4 Moses then said: “This is what Jehovah has said, ‘About midnight I am going out into the midst of Egypt, 5 and every firstborn in the land of Egypt will die, from the firstborn of Pharʹaoh who is sitting on his throne to the firstborn of the slave girl who is working at the hand mill, and every firstborn of the livestock. 6 Throughout all the land of Egypt, there will be a great outcry such as has never occurred nor will ever occur again. 7 But not even a dog will bark at the Israelites, at the men or their livestock, so that you may know that Jehovah can make a distinction between the Egyptians and the Israelites.’ 8 And all your servants will certainly come down to me and prostrate themselves to me, saying, ‘Go, you and all the people who follow you.’ And after that I will go out.” With that he went out from Pharʹaoh in the heat of anger.9 Jehovah then said to Moses: “Pharʹaoh will not listen to you, in order for my miracles to be multiplied in the land of Egypt.” 10 Moses and Aaron performed all these miracles before Pharʹaoh, but Jehovah allowed Pharʹaoh’s heart to become obstinate, so that he did not send the Israelites away from his land.
12 Jehovah now said to Moses and Aaron in the land of Egypt: 2 “This month will be the beginning of the months for you. It will be the first of the months of the year for you. 3 Speak to the entire assembly of Israel, saying, ‘On the tenth day of this month, they should each take for themselves a sheep for their father’s house, a sheep to a house. 4 But if the household is too small for the sheep, they and their nearest neighbor should share it between themselves in their house according to the number of people. When making the calculation, determine how much of the sheep each one will eat. 5 Your sheep should be a sound, one-year-old male. You may choose from the young rams or from the goats. 6 You must care for it until the 14th day of this month, and the whole congregation of the assembly of Israel must slaughter it at twilight. 7 They must take some of the blood and splash it on the two doorposts and the upper part of the doorway of the houses in which they eat it.8 “‘They must eat the meat on this night. They should roast it over the fire and eat it along with unleavened bread and bitter greens. 9 Do not eat any of it raw or boiled, cooked in water, but roast it over the fire, its head together with its shanks and its inner parts. 10 You must not save any of it until morning, but any of it left over until morning you should burn with fire. 11 And this is how you should eat it, with your belt fastened, sandals on your feet, and your staff in your hand; and you should eat it in a hurry. It is Jehovah’s Passover. 12 For I will pass through the land of Egypt on this night and strike every firstborn in the land of Egypt, from man to beast; and I will execute judgment on all the gods of Egypt. I am Jehovah. 13 The blood will serve as your sign on the houses where you are; and I will see the blood and pass over you, and the plague will not come on you to destroy you when I strike the land of Egypt.14 “‘This day will serve as a memorial for you, and you must celebrate it as a festival to Jehovah throughout your generations. As a lasting statute, you should celebrate it. 15 Seven days you are to eat unleavened bread. Yes, on the first day you are to remove the sourdough from your houses, because anyone eating what is leavened from the first day down to the seventh, that person must be cut off from Israel. 16 On the first day you will hold a holy convention, and on the seventh day, another holy convention. No work is to be done on these days. Only what every person needs to eat, that alone may be prepared for you.17 “‘You must keep the Festival of Unleavened Bread, for on this very day, I will bring your multitudes out of the land of Egypt. And you must keep this day throughout your generations as a lasting statute. 18 In the first month, on the 14th day of the month, in the evening, you are to eat unleavened bread until the 21st day of the month, in the evening. 19 No sourdough is to be found in your houses for seven days, because if anyone eats what is leavened, whether he is a foreigner or a native of the land, that person must be cut off from the assembly of Israel. 20 You should not eat anything leavened. In all your homes, you are to eat unleavened bread.’”21 Moses promptly called all the elders of Israel and said to them: “Go and select young animals for each of your families, and slaughter the Passover sacrifice. 22 Then you must dip a bunch of hyssop into the blood that is in a basin and strike the upper part of the doorway and the two doorposts with the blood; and none of you should go out of the entrance of his house until morning. 23 Then when Jehovah passes through to plague the Egyptians and sees the blood on the upper part of the doorway and on the two doorposts, Jehovah will certainly pass over the entrance, and he will not allow the plague of death to enter into your houses.24 “You must observe this event as a lasting regulation for you and your sons. 25 And when you come into the land that Jehovah will give you just as he has stated, you must keep this observance. 26 And when your sons ask you, ‘What does this observance mean to you?’ 27 you must say, ‘It is the sacrifice of the Passover to Jehovah, who passed over the houses of the Israelites in Egypt when he plagued the Egyptians, but he spared our houses.’”Then the people bowed low and prostrated themselves. 28 So the Israelites went and did just as Jehovah had commanded Moses and Aaron. They did just so.29 Then at midnight, Jehovah struck down every firstborn in the land of Egypt, from the firstborn of Pharʹaoh who was sitting on his throne to the firstborn of the captive who was in the prison, and every firstborn of the animals. 30 Pharʹaoh got up that night along with all his servants and all the other Egyptians, and there was a great outcry among the Egyptians, because there was not a house where someone was not dead. 31 At once he called Moses and Aaron by night and said: “Get up, get out from among my people, both you and the other Israelites. Go and serve Jehovah, just as you have said. 32 Take also your flocks and your herds and go, just as you have said. But you must also bless me.”33 And the Egyptians began to urge the people to depart quickly out of the land “because,” as they said, “we are all as good as dead!” 34 So the people carried their flour dough before it was leavened, with their kneading troughs wrapped up in their clothing on their shoulder. 35 The Israelites did what Moses had told them and asked the Egyptians for articles of silver and of gold as well as clothing. 36 Jehovah gave the people favor in the eyes of the Egyptians, so that they gave them what they asked for, and they plundered the Egyptians.37 Then the Israelites departed from Ramʹe·ses for Sucʹcoth, about 600,000 men on foot, besides children. 38 And a vast mixed company also went with them, as well as flocks and herds, a great number of livestock. 39 They began to bake the dough that they brought from Egypt into round loaves of unleavened bread. It was not leavened, because they had been driven out of Egypt so suddenly that they had not prepared any provisions for themselves.40 The dwelling of the Israelites, who had dwelled in Egypt, was 430 years. 41 At the end of the 430 years, on this very day, all the multitudes of Jehovah went out of the land of Egypt. 42 It is a night on which they will celebrate Jehovah’s bringing them out of the land of Egypt. This night is to be observed to Jehovah by all the people of Israel throughout their generations.43 Then Jehovah said to Moses and Aaron, “This is the statute of the Passover: No foreigner may eat of it. 44 But if someone has a slave man who was purchased with money, you should circumcise him. Only then may he share in eating it. 45 A settler and a hired worker may not eat of it. 46 In one house it is to be eaten. You must not take any of the meat outside of the house, and you must not break any of its bones. 47 All the assembly of Israel are to celebrate it. 48 If a foreigner resides with you and he wants to celebrate the Passover to Jehovah, every male of his must be circumcised. Then he may come near to celebrate it, and he will become like a native of the land. But no uncircumcised man may eat of it. 49 One law will apply for the native and for the foreigner who is residing among you.”50 So all the Israelites did just as Jehovah had commanded Moses and Aaron. They did just so. 51 On this very day, Jehovah brought the Israelites along with their multitudes out of the land of Egypt.
13 Jehovah spoke further to Moses, saying: 2 “Sanctify to me every firstborn male among the Israelites. The first male to be born, of both human and animal, belongs to me.”3 Then Moses said to the people: “Remember this day on which you went out of Egypt, from the house of slavery, because with a mighty hand Jehovah brought you out of here. So nothing leavened may be eaten. 4 You are going out on this day, in the month of Aʹbib. 5 When Jehovah has brought you into the land of the Caʹnaan·ites, the Hitʹtites, the Amʹor·ites, the Hiʹvites, and the Jebʹu·sites, which he swore to your forefathers to give you, a land flowing with milk and honey, then you must keep this observance in this month. 6 Seven days you are to eat unleavened bread, and on the seventh day, there will be a festival to Jehovah. 7 Unleavened bread is to be eaten for the seven days; and nothing leavened is to be found with you, and no sourdough is to be found with you within all your territory. 8 And you must tell your son on that day, ‘It is because of what Jehovah did for me when I came out of Egypt.’ 9 And this will serve for you as a sign on your hand and as a memorial on your forehead, so that Jehovah’s law may be in your mouth, for with a mighty hand Jehovah brought you out of Egypt. 10 You must keep this statute at its appointed time from year to year.11 “When Jehovah brings you into the land of the Caʹnaan·ites, which he has sworn to you and to your forefathers to give to you, 12 you must devote to Jehovah every firstborn male, as well as every male firstling of the livestock that you acquire. The males belong to Jehovah. 13 Every firstling donkey you are to redeem with a sheep, and if you do not redeem it, then you must break its neck. And every firstborn male of your sons you are to redeem.14 “In case your son should ask you later on, ‘What does this mean?’ then you should say to him, ‘With a mighty hand Jehovah brought us out of Egypt, from the house of slavery. 15 When Pharʹaoh stubbornly refused to send us away, Jehovah killed every firstborn in the land of Egypt, from the firstborn of man to the firstborn of beast. That is why I am sacrificing to Jehovah all the firstborn males, and I redeem every firstborn of my sons.’ 16 This must serve as a sign on your hand and as a headband on your forehead, for with a mighty hand Jehovah brought us out of Egypt.”17 Now when Pharʹaoh sent the people away, God did not lead them by the way of the land of the Phi·lisʹtines, although it was near. For God said: “The people may change their minds when they are confronted by war and will return to Egypt.” 18 So God made the people go around by the way of the wilderness of the Red Sea. But it was in battle formation that the Israelites went up out of the land of Egypt. 19 Moses also took Joseph’s bones with him, because Joseph had made the sons of Israel solemnly swear: “God will not fail to turn his attention to you, and you must take my bones up out of here with you.” 20 They departed from Sucʹcoth and encamped at Eʹtham, at the edge of the wilderness.21 Now Jehovah was going ahead of them by day in a pillar of cloud to lead them along the way, and by night in a pillar of fire to give them light, so that they could travel by day and by night. 22 The pillar of cloud would not move away from before the people during the day, nor the pillar of fire at night.
14 Jehovah now said to Moses: 2 “Tell the Israelites that they should turn back and encamp before Pi·ha·hiʹroth, between Migʹdol and the sea, within view of Baʹal-zeʹphon. You are to encamp facing it by the sea. 3 Then Pharʹaoh will say about the Israelites, ‘They are wandering in confusion in the land. The wilderness has closed in on them.’ 4 I will allow Pharʹaoh’s heart to become obstinate, and he will chase after them, and I will glorify myself by means of Pharʹaoh and all his army; and the Egyptians will certainly know that I am Jehovah.” So that is what they did.5 Later it was reported to the king of Egypt that the people had run away. Immediately, Pharʹaoh and his servants had a change of heart regarding the people, and they said: “Why did we do this and release Israel from serving as slaves for us?” 6 So he made his war chariots ready, and he took his people with him. 7 He took 600 chosen chariots and all the other chariots of Egypt, with warriors on every one of them. 8 Thus Jehovah allowed the heart of Pharʹaoh king of Egypt to become obstinate, and he chased after the Israelites, while the Israelites were going out with confidence. 9 The Egyptians chased after them, and all the chariot horses of Pharʹaoh and his cavalrymen and his army were catching up with them while they were camping by the sea, by Pi·ha·hiʹroth, facing Baʹal-zeʹphon.10 When Pharʹaoh got closer, the Israelites raised their eyes and saw the Egyptians pursuing them. The Israelites became terrified and began to cry out to Jehovah. 11 They said to Moses: “Is it because there are no burial places in Egypt that you have brought us here to die in the wilderness? What have you done to us by leading us out of Egypt? 12 Is this not the very thing we told you in Egypt when we said, ‘Let us alone, so that we may serve the Egyptians’? For it is better for us to serve the Egyptians than to die in the wilderness.” 13 Then Moses said to the people: “Do not be afraid. Stand firm and see the salvation of Jehovah that he will perform for you today. For the Egyptians whom you see today, you will never ever see again. 14 Jehovah himself will fight for you, and you will keep silent.”15 Jehovah now said to Moses: “Why do you keep crying out to me? Tell the Israelites that they should break camp. 16 As for you, lift up your rod and stretch out your hand over the sea and divide it, so that the Israelites may go through the midst of the sea on dry ground. 17 As for me, I am allowing the hearts of the Egyptians to become obstinate, so that they will go in after them; thus I will glorify myself by means of Pharʹaoh and all his army, his war chariots, and his cavalrymen. 18 And the Egyptians will certainly know that I am Jehovah when I glorify myself by means of Pharʹaoh, his war chariots, and his cavalrymen.”19 Then the angel of the true God who was going ahead of the camp of Israel departed and went to their rear, and the pillar of cloud that was in front of them moved to the rear and stood behind them. 20 So it came between the camp of the Egyptians and the camp of Israel. On the one side, it was a dark cloud. On the other side, it was lighting up the night. So the one camp did not come near the other camp all night long.21 Moses now stretched out his hand over the sea; and Jehovah drove the sea back with a strong east wind all night long, turning the sea basin into dry ground, and the waters divided. 22 So the Israelites went through the midst of the sea on dry ground, while the waters formed a wall on their right hand and on their left. 23 The Egyptians pursued them, and all Pharʹaoh’s horses, his war chariots, and his cavalrymen began going after them into the midst of the sea. 24 During the morning watch, Jehovah looked at the camp of the Egyptians from within the pillar of fire and cloud, and he threw the camp of the Egyptians into confusion. 25 He kept taking wheels off their chariots so that they were driving them with difficulty, and the Egyptians were saying: “Let us flee from any contact with Israel, because Jehovah is fighting for them against the Egyptians.”26 Then Jehovah said to Moses: “Stretch out your hand over the sea so that the waters may come back over the Egyptians, their war chariots, and their cavalrymen.” 27 Moses at once stretched out his hand over the sea, and as morning approached, the sea returned to its normal condition. As the Egyptians fled from it, Jehovah shook the Egyptians off into the midst of the sea. 28 The returning waters covered the war chariots and the cavalrymen and all of Pharʹaoh’s army who had gone into the sea after them. Not so much as one among them was allowed to survive.29 But the Israelites walked on dry ground in the midst of the seabed, and the waters formed a wall on their right hand and on their left. 30 Thus Jehovah saved Israel on that day from the hand of the Egyptians, and Israel saw the Egyptians dead on the seashore. 31 Israel also saw the great power that Jehovah wielded against the Egyptians, and the people began to fear Jehovah and to put faith in Jehovah and in his servant Moses.
15 At that time Moses and the Israelites sang this song to Jehovah:“Let me sing to Jehovah, for he has become highly exalted.The horse and its rider he has hurled into the sea. 2 My strength and my might is Jah, since he has become my salvation.This is my God, and I will praise him; my father’s God, and I will exalt him. 3 Jehovah is a powerful warrior. Jehovah is his name. 4 Pharʹaoh’s chariots and his army He has cast into the sea,And his finest warriors have sunk into the Red Sea. 5 The surging waters covered them; down into the depths they sank like a stone. 6 Your right hand, O Jehovah, is great in power;Your right hand, O Jehovah, can shatter an enemy. 7 In your great majesty you can throw down those who rise up against you;You send out your burning anger, it eats them up like stubble. 8 By a breath from your nostrils waters massed together;They stood still, holding back the floods;The surging waters congealed in the heart of the sea. 9 The enemy said: ‘I will pursue! I will overtake!I will divide spoil until I am satisfied!I will draw my sword! My hand will subdue them!’10 You blew with your breath, the sea covered them;They sank like lead in majestic waters.11 Who among the gods is like you, O Jehovah?Who is like you, showing yourself mighty in holiness?The One to be feared with songs of praise, the One doing wonders.12 You stretched out your right hand, and the earth swallowed them up.13 In your loyal love you have led the people whom you have redeemed;In your strength you will guide them to your holy place of dwelling.14 Peoples must hear; they will shudder;Anguish will seize the inhabitants of Phi·lisʹti·a.15 At that time the sheikhs of Eʹdom will be terrified,And trembling will take hold of the mighty rulers of Moʹab.All the inhabitants of Caʹnaan will be disheartened.16 Fear and dread will fall upon them.Because of the greatness of your arm they will be as motionless as a stoneUntil your people pass by, O Jehovah,Until the people whom you produced pass by.17 You will bring them and plant them in the mountain of your inheritance,The established place that you have prepared for yourself to inhabit, O Jehovah,A sanctuary, O Jehovah, that your hands have established.18 Jehovah will rule as king forever and ever.19 When Pharʹaoh’s horses with his war chariots and his cavalrymen went into the sea,Then Jehovah brought back the waters of the sea upon them,But the people of Israel walked on dry ground through the midst of the sea.”20 Then Mirʹi·am the prophetess, Aaron’s sister, took a tambourine in her hand, and all the women followed her with tambourines and with dances. 21 Mirʹi·am sang in response to the men:“Sing to Jehovah, for he has become highly exalted.The horse and its rider he has hurled into the sea.”22 Moses later led Israel away from the Red Sea, and they went out to the wilderness of Shur and marched on for three days in the wilderness, but they did not find water. 23 They came to Maʹrah, but they were not able to drink the water from Maʹrah because it was bitter. That is why he named it Maʹrah. 24 So the people began to murmur against Moses, saying: “What are we to drink?” 25 He cried out to Jehovah, and Jehovah directed him to a tree. When he threw it into the water, the water became sweet.There He established for them a regulation and a case for judgment, and there He put them to the test. 26 He said: “If you will strictly listen to the voice of Jehovah your God and will do what is right in his eyes and will pay attention to his commandments and keep all his regulations, I will not bring upon you any of the diseases that I brought upon the Egyptians, for I, Jehovah, am healing you.”27 After that they came to Eʹlim, where there were 12 springs of water and 70 palm trees. So they camped there by the water.
16 After they departed from Eʹlim, the entire assembly of the Israelites eventually came to the wilderness of Sin, which is between Eʹlim and Siʹnai, on the 15th day of the second month after their departure from the land of Egypt.2 Then the entire assembly of the Israelites began to murmur against Moses and Aaron in the wilderness. 3 The Israelites kept saying to them: “If only we had died by Jehovah’s hand in the land of Egypt while we were sitting by the pots of meat, while we were eating bread to satisfaction. Now you have brought us out into this wilderness to put this whole congregation to death by famine.”4 Then Jehovah said to Moses: “Here I am raining down bread for you from the heavens, and each of the people should go out to gather his amount day by day, so that I may put them to the test to see whether they will walk in my law or not. 5 But on the sixth day when they prepare what they have gathered, it is to be double the amount that they pick up on each of the other days.”6 So Moses and Aaron said to all the Israelites: “In the evening you will certainly know that it is Jehovah who brought you out of the land of Egypt. 7 In the morning you will see Jehovah’s glory, for he has heard your murmurings against Jehovah. Who are we that you should murmur against us?” 8 Moses continued: “When Jehovah gives you meat to eat in the evening and in the morning bread to satisfaction, you will see that Jehovah has heard your murmurings that you are murmuring against him. But who are we? Your murmurings are not against us, but against Jehovah.”9 Then Moses said to Aaron: “Tell the entire assembly of the Israelites, ‘Come near before Jehovah, for he has heard your murmurings.’” 10 As soon as Aaron had spoken to the entire assembly of the Israelites, they turned and faced toward the wilderness, and look! Jehovah’s glory appeared in the cloud.11 Jehovah spoke further to Moses, saying: 12 “I have heard the murmurings of the Israelites. Tell them, ‘At twilight you will eat meat, and in the morning you will be satisfied with bread, and you will certainly know that I am Jehovah your God.’”13 So that evening quail came and covered the camp, and in the morning a layer of dew was all around the camp. 14 When the layer of dew evaporated, there was a fine, flaky substance on the surface of the wilderness, as fine as frost on the ground. 15 When the Israelites saw it, they began to say to one another, “What is it?” for they did not know what it was. Moses said to them: “It is the bread that Jehovah has given you for food. 16 This is what Jehovah has commanded, ‘Each one should gather it according to how much he can eat. You are to take an omer measure for each individual according to the number of the people that each of you has in his tent.’” 17 The Israelites began to do so; they gathered it, some gathering much and some gathering little. 18 When they would measure it by the omer, the one who had gathered much had no surplus and the one who had gathered little had no shortage. They each gathered it according to what they could eat.19 Then Moses said to them: “Nobody should leave any of it until the morning.” 20 But they did not listen to Moses. When some men left some of it until the morning, it bred worms and stank, and Moses became indignant at them. 21 They would pick it up morning by morning, each one according to what he could eat. When the sun got hot, it melted.22 On the sixth day, they picked up twice as much bread, two omer measures for each person. So all the chieftains of the assembly came and reported it to Moses. 23 At that he said to them: “It is what Jehovah has said. Tomorrow there will be a complete rest, a holy sabbath to Jehovah. Bake what you need to bake, and boil what you need to boil; then save whatever is left over and keep it until the morning.” 24 So they saved it until the morning, just as Moses had commanded, and it did not stink nor were there maggots in it. 25 Then Moses said: “Eat it today, because today is a sabbath to Jehovah. Today you will not find it on the ground. 26 You will pick it up for six days, but on the seventh day, the Sabbath, there will be none.” 27 However, some of the people did go out to pick it up on the seventh day, but they found nothing.28 So Jehovah said to Moses: “How long will you refuse to keep my commandments and my laws? 29 Take notice of the fact that Jehovah has given you the Sabbath. That is why he is giving you the bread for two days on the sixth day. Everyone must stay where he is; nobody is to leave his locality on the seventh day.” 30 So the people observed the Sabbath on the seventh day.31 The house of Israel named the bread “manna.” It was white like coriander seed, and its taste was like that of flat cakes with honey. 32 Then Moses said: “This is what Jehovah has commanded, ‘Fill an omer measure of it as something to be kept throughout your generations, so that they may see the bread that I gave you to eat in the wilderness when I was bringing you out of the land of Egypt.’” 33 So Moses said to Aaron: “Take a jar and put in it an omer measure of manna and deposit it before Jehovah as something to be kept throughout your generations.” 34 Just as Jehovah commanded Moses, Aaron placed it before the Testimony so that it might be preserved. 35 The Israelites ate the manna for 40 years, until they came to a land that was inhabited. They ate the manna until they came to the frontier of the land of Caʹnaan. 36 Now an omer is a tenth of an eʹphah measure.
17 The entire assembly of the Israelites departed from the wilderness of Sin by stages according to the order of Jehovah, and they camped at Rephʹi·dim. But there was no water for the people to drink.2 So the people began quarreling with Moses and saying: “Give us water to drink.” But Moses said to them: “Why are you quarreling with me? Why do you keep putting Jehovah to the test?” 3 But the people were very thirsty for water there, and they kept murmuring against Moses and saying: “Why have you brought us up out of Egypt to kill us and our sons and our livestock with thirst?” 4 Finally Moses cried out to Jehovah: “What should I do with this people? A little longer and they will stone me!”5 Then Jehovah said to Moses: “Go ahead of the people, and take with you some of the elders of Israel and your rod with which you struck the Nile River. Take it in your hand and walk on. 6 Look! I will be standing before you there on the rock in Hoʹreb. You must strike the rock, and water will come out of it, and the people will drink it.” Moses did so before the eyes of the elders of Israel. 7 So he named the place Masʹsah and Merʹi·bah because of the quarreling of the Israelites and because they put Jehovah to the test by saying: “Is Jehovah in our midst or not?”8 Then the A·malʹek·ites came and fought against Israel in Rephʹi·dim. 9 At this Moses said to Joshua: “Choose men for us and go out to fight against the A·malʹek·ites. Tomorrow I will stand on top of the hill, with the rod of the true God in my hand.” 10 Then Joshua did just as Moses told him, and he fought against the A·malʹek·ites. And Moses, Aaron, and Hur went up to the top of the hill.11 As long as Moses kept his hands lifted up, the Israelites prevailed, but as soon as he would let down his hands, the A·malʹek·ites prevailed. 12 When the hands of Moses were heavy, they took a stone and put it under him, and he sat on it. Then Aaron and Hur, one on each side, supported his hands, so that his hands remained steady until the sun set. 13 Thus Joshua defeated Amʹa·lek and his people with the sword.14 Jehovah now said to Moses: “Write this as a memorial in the book and repeat it to Joshua, ‘I will completely wipe out the memory of Amʹa·lek from under the heavens.’” 15 Then Moses built an altar and named it Je·hoʹvah-nisʹsi, 16 saying: “Because his hand is against the throne of Jah, Jehovah will have war with Amʹa·lek from generation to generation.”
18 Now Jethʹro the priest of Midʹi·an, Moses’ father-in-law, heard about all that God had done for Moses and for his people Israel, how Jehovah had brought Israel out of Egypt. 2 Jethʹro, Moses’ father-in-law, had taken in Zip·poʹrah, Moses’ wife, when she was sent back to him, 3 along with her two sons. One son was named Gerʹshom, because Moses said, “I have become a foreign resident in a foreign land,” 4 and the other was named E·li·eʹzer, because he said, “The God of my father is my helper, who rescued me from Pharʹaoh’s sword.”5 So Jethʹro, Moses’ father-in-law, along with Moses’ sons and his wife, came to Moses into the wilderness where he was camping at the mountain of the true God. 6 Then he sent word to Moses: “I, your father-in-law Jethʹro, am coming to you with your wife and her two sons.” 7 At once Moses went out to meet his father-in-law, and he bowed down and kissed him. Each of them asked about the other’s welfare, and then they went into the tent.8 Moses related to his father-in-law all that Jehovah had done to Pharʹaoh and Egypt in behalf of Israel, all the hardships that had befallen them along the way, and how Jehovah had delivered them. 9 Jethʹro rejoiced over all the good that Jehovah had done for Israel by rescuing them from Egypt. 10 Then Jethʹro said: “Praised be Jehovah, who rescued you from Egypt and from Pharʹaoh, and who rescued the people from under Egypt’s control. 11 Now I know that Jehovah is greater than all the other gods, because of what he did to those who acted arrogantly against his people.” 12 Then Jethʹro, Moses’ father-in-law, brought a burnt offering and sacrifices for God, and Aaron and all the elders of Israel came to eat a meal with Moses’ father-in-law before the true God.13 On the next day, Moses sat down as usual to serve as judge for the people, and the people kept standing before Moses from morning until evening. 14 When Moses’ father-in-law saw all that he was doing for the people, he said: “What is this that you are doing for the people? Why do you sit here alone with all the people standing before you from morning until evening?” 15 Moses said to his father-in-law: “Because the people keep coming to me to inquire of God. 16 When a case arises, it comes to me and I must judge between one person and the other, and I make known the decisions of the true God and his laws.”17 Moses’ father-in-law said to him: “What you are doing is not good. 18 You will surely wear out, both you and this people who are with you, because this is too big a load for you and you cannot carry it by yourself. 19 Now listen to me. I will give you advice, and God will be with you. You serve as representative for the people before the true God, and you must bring the cases to the true God. 20 You should warn them about what the regulations and the laws are and make known to them the way in which they should walk and the work that they should do. 21 But you should select from the people capable men fearing God, trustworthy men hating dishonest profit, and appoint these over them as chiefs over thousands, chiefs over hundreds, chiefs over fifties, and chiefs over tens. 22 They should judge the people when cases arise, and they will bring every difficult case to you, but every minor case they will decide. Make it easier for yourself by letting them share the load along with you. 23 If you do this, and God so commands you, you will be able to stand the strain, and everyone will go home satisfied.”24 Moses immediately listened to his father-in-law and did all that he had said. 25 Moses chose capable men out of all Israel and appointed them heads over the people, as chiefs of thousands, chiefs of hundreds, chiefs of fifties, and chiefs of tens. 26 So they judged the people when cases arose. A difficult case they would bring to Moses, but every minor case they would judge. 27 After that Moses saw his father-in-law off, and he went his way to his land.
19 In the third month after the Israelites went out of the land of Egypt, on the same day, they came to the wilderness of Siʹnai. 2 They pulled away from Rephʹi·dim and came to the wilderness of Siʹnai and camped in the wilderness. Israel camped there in front of the mountain.3 Then Moses went up to the true God, and Jehovah called to him from the mountain, saying: “This is what you are to say to the house of Jacob and to tell the Israelites, 4 ‘You have seen for yourselves what I did to the Egyptians, in order to carry you on wings of eagles and bring you to myself. 5 Now if you will strictly obey my voice and keep my covenant, you will certainly become my special property out of all peoples, for the whole earth belongs to me. 6 You will become to me a kingdom of priests and a holy nation.’ These are the words that you are to say to the Israelites.”7 So Moses went and summoned the elders of the people and declared to them all these words that Jehovah had commanded him. 8 After that all the people answered unanimously: “All that Jehovah has spoken, we are willing to do.” Moses immediately took the people’s response to Jehovah. 9 And Jehovah said to Moses: “Look! I am coming to you in a dark cloud, so that the people may hear when I speak with you and so that they may always put faith in you as well.” Then Moses reported the words of the people to Jehovah.10 Then Jehovah said to Moses: “Go to the people and sanctify them today and tomorrow, and they must wash their clothing. 11 And they must be ready for the third day, because on the third day Jehovah will come down upon Mount Siʹnai before the eyes of all the people. 12 You must set boundaries for the people all around it and tell them, ‘Beware of going up to the mountain or touching its border. Anybody touching the mountain will surely be put to death. 13 No hand is to touch him, but he will either be stoned or be shot through. Whether beast or man, he will not live.’ But at the sound of the ram’s horn they may come up to the mountain.”14 Then Moses went down from the mountain to the people, and he began to sanctify the people, and they washed their clothing. 15 He said to the people: “Get ready for the third day. Abstain from sexual relations.”16 On the morning of the third day, there was thunder and lightning, and there was a heavy cloud on the mountain and a very loud sound of a horn, and all the people in the camp began to tremble. 17 Moses now brought the people out of the camp to meet the true God, and they took their place at the base of the mountain. 18 Mount Siʹnai smoked all over, because Jehovah came down upon it in fire; and its smoke was rising like the smoke of a kiln, and the whole mountain was trembling violently. 19 As the sound of the horn grew louder and louder, Moses spoke, and the voice of the true God answered him.20 So Jehovah came down upon Mount Siʹnai to the top of the mountain. Then Jehovah called Moses to the top of the mountain, and Moses went up. 21 Jehovah now said to Moses: “Go down and warn the people not to try to force their way through to look at Jehovah, or many of them will perish. 22 And let the priests who regularly come near to Jehovah sanctify themselves, so that Jehovah may not strike them.” 23 Moses then said to Jehovah: “The people are not able to come up to Mount Siʹnai because you already warned us, saying, ‘Set boundaries around the mountain, and make it sacred.’” 24 However, Jehovah said to him: “Go, descend, and come back up, you and Aaron with you, but do not let the priests and the people force their way through to come up to Jehovah, so that he may not strike them.” 25 So Moses descended to the people and told them.
2 About that time, a certain man of the house of Leʹvi married a daughter of Leʹvi. 2 And the woman became pregnant and gave birth to a son. When she saw how beautiful he was, she kept him concealed for three months. 3 When she was no longer able to conceal him, she took a papyrus basket and coated it with bitumen and pitch and put the child in it and placed it among the reeds by the bank of the Nile River. 4 But his sister stood at a distance to see what would happen to him.5 When Pharʹaoh’s daughter came down to bathe in the Nile, her female attendants were walking by the side of the Nile. And she caught sight of the basket in the middle of the reeds. She immediately sent her slave girl to get it. 6 When she opened it, she saw the child, and the boy was crying. She felt compassion for him, but she said: “This is one of the children of the Hebrews.” 7 Then his sister said to Pharʹaoh’s daughter: “Shall I go and call a nursing woman from the Hebrews to nurse the child for you?” 8 Pharʹaoh’s daughter said to her: “Go!” At once the girl went and called the child’s mother. 9 Pharʹaoh’s daughter then said to her: “Take this child with you and nurse him for me, and I will pay you.” So the woman took the child and nursed him. 10 When the child grew older, she brought him to Pharʹaoh’s daughter, and he became a son to her. She named him Moses and said: “It is because I have drawn him out of the water.”11 Now in those days, after Moses had become an adult, he went out to his brothers to look at the burdens they were bearing, and he caught sight of an Egyptian beating a Hebrew, one of his brothers. 12 So he looked this way and that, and seeing no one, he killed the Egyptian and hid him in the sand.13 But he went out on the following day, and there were two Hebrew men fighting with each other. So he said to the one in the wrong: “Why do you strike your companion?” 14 At this he said: “Who appointed you as a prince and a judge over us? Are you planning to kill me just as you killed the Egyptian?” Moses now was afraid and said: “Surely the matter has become known!”15 Then Pharʹaoh heard about it, and he attempted to kill Moses; but Moses ran away from Pharʹaoh and went to dwell in the land of Midʹi·an, and he sat down by a well. 16 Now the priest of Midʹi·an had seven daughters, and these came to draw water and to fill the troughs to water their father’s flock. 17 But as usual, the shepherds came and drove them away. At this Moses got up and helped the women and watered their flock. 18 When they came home to their father Reuʹel, he exclaimed: “How is it that you have come home so quickly today?” 19 They replied: “A certain Egyptian rescued us from the shepherds, and he even drew water for us and watered the flock.” 20 He said to his daughters: “But where is he? Why did you leave the man behind? Call him, so that he may eat with us.” 21 After that Moses consented to stay with the man, and he gave his daughter Zip·poʹrah to Moses in marriage. 22 Later she bore a son, and he named him Gerʹshom, for he said, “I have become a foreign resident in a foreign land.”23 After a long time, the king of Egypt died, but the Israelites continued to groan because of the slavery and to cry out in complaint, and their cry for help because of the slavery kept going up to the true God. 24 In time God heard their groaning, and God remembered his covenant with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. 25 So God looked on the Israelites; and God took notice.
20 Then God spoke all these words:2 “I am Jehovah your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of slavery. 3 You must not have any other gods besides me.4 “You must not make for yourself a carved image or a form like anything that is in the heavens above or on the earth below or in the waters under the earth. 5 You must not bow down to them nor be enticed to serve them, for I, Jehovah your God, am a God who requires exclusive devotion, bringing punishment for the error of fathers upon sons, upon the third generation and upon the fourth generation of those who hate me, 6 but showing loyal love to the thousandth generation of those who love me and keep my commandments.7 “You must not take up the name of Jehovah your God in a worthless way, for Jehovah will not leave unpunished the one who takes up His name in a worthless way.8 “Remember the Sabbath day to keep it sacred. 9 You are to labor and do all your work for six days, 10 but the seventh day is a sabbath to Jehovah your God. You must not do any work, neither you nor your son nor your daughter nor your slave man nor your slave girl nor your domestic animal nor your foreign resident who is inside your settlements. 11 For in six days Jehovah made the heavens and the earth, the sea, and all that is in them, and he began to rest on the seventh day. That is why Jehovah blessed the Sabbath day and made it sacred.12 “Honor your father and your mother, so that you may live a long time in the land that Jehovah your God is giving you.13 “You must not murder.14 “You must not commit adultery.15 “You must not steal.16 “You must not testify falsely when you are a witness against your fellow man.17 “You must not desire your fellow man’s house. You must not desire your fellow man’s wife nor his slave man nor his slave girl nor his bull nor his donkey nor anything that belongs to your fellow man.”18 Now all the people were witnessing the thunder and lightning, the sound of the horn, and the mountain smoking; and seeing this made them tremble and stand at a distance. 19 So they said to Moses: “You speak with us, and we will listen, but do not let God speak with us, for fear that we will die.” 20 So Moses said to the people: “Do not be afraid, for the true God has come to put you to the test, in order that the fear of him may continue with you so that you may not sin.” 21 So the people kept standing at a distance, but Moses went near to the dark cloud where the true God was.22 Then Jehovah said to Moses: “This is what you are to say to the Israelites, ‘You have seen for yourselves that I spoke with you from heaven. 23 You must not make gods of silver alongside me, and you must not make gods of gold for yourselves. 24 An altar of earth you are to make for me, and you will sacrifice on it your burnt offerings, your communion sacrifices, your flock, and your herd. In every place where I cause my name to be remembered I will come to you and I will bless you. 25 If you make an altar of stones for me, you must not build it using stones cut with tools. For if you do use your chisel on it, you will profane it. 26 And you must not go up by steps to my altar, that your private parts may not be exposed upon it.’
21 “These are the judicial decisions that you are to convey to them:2 “If you buy a Hebrew slave, he will serve as a slave for six years, but in the seventh year, he will be set free without paying anything. 3 If he came by himself, he will go out by himself. If he is the husband of a wife, then his wife must go out with him. 4 If his master gives him a wife and she bears him sons or daughters, the wife and her children will become her master’s, and he will go out by himself. 5 But if the slave should insist and say, ‘I love my master, my wife, and my sons; I do not want to be set free,’ 6 his master must bring him before the true God. Then he will bring him up against the door or the doorpost, and his master will pierce his ear through with an awl, and he will be his slave for life.7 “If a man sells his daughter as a slave, she will not go free the same way that a slave man does. 8 If her master is not pleased with her and he does not designate her as a concubine but causes her to be purchased by someone else, he will not be entitled to sell her to foreigners, for he has betrayed her. 9 If he selects her for his son, he is to grant her the rights of a daughter. 10 If he takes another wife for himself, the sustenance, the clothing, and the marriage due of the first wife are not to be diminished. 11 If he will not render these three things to her, then she is to go free without paying any money.12 “Anyone who strikes a man so that he dies must be put to death. 13 But if he does it unintentionally and the true God lets it happen, I will designate for you a place where he can flee. 14 If a man becomes very angry with his fellow man and he deliberately kills him, the man must die even if you have to take him from my altar. 15 One who strikes his father or his mother must be put to death.16 “If anyone kidnaps a man and sells him or is caught holding him, he must be put to death.17 “Anyone who curses his father or his mother must be put to death.18 “This is what should happen if men quarrel and one strikes his fellow man with a stone or a fist and he does not die but is confined to his bed: 19 If he is able to get up and walk around outdoors with the aid of a staff, then the one who struck him must be free from punishment. He will only make compensation for the time the injured man lost from his work until he is completely healed.20 “If a man strikes his slave man or his slave girl with a stick and that one dies by his hand, that one must be avenged. 21 However, if he survives for one or two days, he is not to be avenged, because he is someone bought with his owner’s money.22 “If men should struggle with each other and they hurt a pregnant woman and she gives birth prematurely but no fatality results, the offender must pay the damages imposed on him by the husband of the woman; and he must pay it through the judges. 23 But if a fatality does occur, then you must give life for life, 24 eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot, 25 burn for burn, wound for wound, blow for blow.26 “If a man strikes the eye of his slave man or the eye of his slave girl and he destroys it, he is to let the slave go free in compensation for his eye. 27 And if he knocks out the tooth of his slave man or of his slave girl, he is to let the slave go free in compensation for his tooth.28 “If a bull gores a man or a woman and that one dies, the bull must be stoned to death and its meat is not to be eaten; but the owner of the bull is free from punishment. 29 But if a bull was in the habit of goring and its owner had been warned but he would not keep it under guard and it killed a man or a woman, the bull is to be stoned and its owner is also to be put to death. 30 If a ransom is imposed on him, he must give as the redemption price for his life all that may be imposed on him. 31 Whether it gored a son or a daughter, it is to be done to the bull’s owner according to this judicial decision. 32 If the bull gored a slave man or a slave girl, he will give the price of 30 shekels to that one’s master, and the bull will be stoned to death.33 “If a man uncovers or digs a pit and does not cover it and a bull or a donkey falls into it, 34 the owner of the pit is to make compensation. He is to pay the price to its owner, and the dead animal will become his. 35 If a man’s bull hurts another’s bull and it dies, then they must sell the live bull and divide the price paid for it; they should also divide the dead animal. 36 Or if it was known that a bull had been in the habit of goring but its owner would not keep it under guard, he must make compensation with bull for bull, and the dead one will become his own.
22 “If a man steals a bull or a sheep and he slaughters or sells it, he is to compensate with five bulls for the bull and four sheep for the sheep.2 (“If a thief is found in the act of breaking in and he gets struck and dies, there is no bloodguilt for him. 3 But if it happens after sunrise, there is bloodguilt for him.)“He must make compensation. If he has nothing, then he must be sold for the things he stole. 4 If what he stole is found alive in his possession, whether it is a bull or a donkey or a sheep, he is to make double compensation.5 “If anyone puts his animals out to graze in a field or a vineyard and lets them graze in someone else’s field, he is to make compensation with the best of his own field or with the best of his own vineyard.6 “If a fire starts and spreads to thornbushes and it causes sheaves or standing grain or a field to be consumed, the one who started the fire must make compensation for what was burned.7 “If a man gives his fellow man money or articles to keep and these are stolen from the fellow man’s house, if the thief is found, he must make double compensation. 8 If the thief is not found, the owner of the house must be brought before the true God in order to determine whether he put his hand on the goods of his fellow man. 9 In all cases of illegal possession of goods, concerning a bull, a donkey, a sheep, a garment, or anything lost of which he may say, ‘This is mine!’ both parties will present their case before the true God. The one whom God pronounces guilty is to make double compensation to his fellow man.10 “If a man gives his fellow man a donkey or a bull or a sheep or any domestic animal to keep and it dies or gets maimed or gets led away while nobody is looking, 11 there should be an oath made between them before Jehovah, that he did not lay his hand on the goods of his fellow man; and the owner must accept it. The other man is not to make compensation. 12 But if the animal has been stolen from him, he is to make compensation to its owner. 13 If it was torn by a wild animal, he is to bring it as evidence. He is not to make compensation for something torn by a wild animal.14 “But if anybody asks to borrow an animal from his fellow man and it gets maimed or it dies while its owner is not with it, the man who borrowed it must make compensation. 15 If its owner is with it, he is not to make compensation. If it was hired, the money paid for the hire is the compensation.16 “Now if a man seduces a virgin who is not engaged and he lies down with her, he must pay the bride-price for her to become his wife. 17 If her father absolutely refuses to give her to him, he is to pay the money at the rate of the bride-price.18 “You must not allow a sorceress to live.19 “Anyone lying down with an animal must surely be put to death.20 “Whoever sacrifices to any gods but Jehovah alone is to be devoted to destruction.21 “You must not mistreat a foreign resident or oppress him, for you were foreign residents in the land of Egypt.22 “You must not afflict any widow or fatherless child. 23 If you afflict him at all, so that he cries out to me, I will unfailingly hear his outcry; 24 and my anger will blaze, and I will kill you with the sword, and your wives will become widows, and your children will be fatherless.25 “If you lend money to anyone poor of my people, someone who is dwelling with you, you must not become like a moneylender to him. You must not charge him interest.26 “If you seize the garment of your fellow man as security for a loan, you are to return it to him by sunset. 27 For it is his only covering, his clothing to cover his body; in what will he lie down to sleep? When he cries out to me, I will certainly hear, for I am compassionate.28 “You must not curse God nor curse a chieftain among your people.29 “You must not hesitate to make offerings from your abundant produce and the overflow of your presses. The firstborn of your sons you are to give to me. 30 This is what you should do with your bull and your sheep: Seven days it will continue with its mother. On the eighth day, you are to give it to me.31 “You should prove yourselves holy people to me, and you must not eat the flesh of anything in the field that has been torn by a wild animal. You should throw it to the dogs.
23 “You must not spread a report that is not true. Do not cooperate with a wicked one by becoming a malicious witness. 2 You must not follow after the crowd to do evil, and you must not pervert justice by giving testimony to go along with the crowd. 3 You must show impartiality in the dispute of a poor person.4 “If you come upon your enemy’s bull or his donkey straying, you must return it to him. 5 If you see that the donkey of someone who hates you has fallen under its load, you must not ignore it and leave. You must help him release the animal.6 “You are not to pervert the judgment of the poor one among you in his legal case.7 “Have nothing to do with a false accusation, and do not kill the innocent and the righteous, for I will not declare the wicked one righteous.8 “You must not accept a bribe, for the bribe blinds clear-sighted men and can distort the words of righteous men.9 “You must not oppress a foreign resident. You know how it feels to be a foreigner, because you were foreign residents in the land of Egypt.10 “You are to sow your land with seed and gather its produce for six years. 11 But the seventh year you should leave it uncultivated and let it lie fallow, and the poor among your people will eat of it, and what they leave, the wild animals of the field will eat. That is what you should do with your vineyard and your olive grove.12 “Six days you are to do your work; but on the seventh day, you are to cease from your labor, in order that your bull and your donkey may rest and the son of your slave girl and the foreign resident may refresh themselves.13 “You must be careful to do all that I have said to you, and you must not mention the names of other gods; they should not be heard on your lips.14 “Three times a year you are to celebrate a festival to me. 15 You will observe the Festival of Unleavened Bread. You will eat unleavened bread for seven days, just as I have commanded you, at the appointed time in the month of Aʹbib, for at that time you came out of Egypt. No one is to appear before me empty-handed. 16 Also, you are to observe the Festival of Harvest of the first ripe fruits of your labors, of what you sow in the field; and the Festival of Ingathering at the end of the year, when you gather in from the field the results of your labors. 17 Three times a year all your men are to appear before the true Lord, Jehovah.18 “You must not offer the blood of my sacrifice with anything leavened. And the sacrifices of fat offered at my festivals should not stay overnight until the morning.19 “You are to bring the best of the first ripe fruits of your ground to the house of Jehovah your God.“You must not boil a young goat in its mother’s milk.20 “I am sending an angel ahead of you to guard you on the way and to bring you into the place that I have prepared. 21 Pay attention to him, and obey his voice. Do not rebel against him, for he will not pardon your transgressions, because my name is in him. 22 However, if you strictly obey his voice and do all that I say, I will show hostility to your enemies and oppose those who oppose you. 23 For my angel will go ahead of you and will bring you to the Amʹor·ites, the Hitʹtites, the Perʹiz·zites, the Caʹnaan·ites, the Hiʹvites, and the Jebʹu·sites, and I will annihilate them. 24 You must not bow down to their gods or be persuaded to serve them, and you must not imitate their practices. Instead, you must demolish them and smash their sacred pillars. 25 You must serve Jehovah your God, and he will bless your bread and your water. I will remove sickness from among you. 26 The women in your land will not suffer a miscarriage or be barren, and I will give you a full life span.27 “I will send the fear of me ahead of you, and I will throw into confusion all the people you encounter, and I will cause all your enemies to flee from you in defeat. 28 I will send the feeling of dejection ahead of you, and it will drive the Hiʹvites, the Caʹnaan·ites, and the Hitʹtites out from before you. 29 I will not drive them out from before you in one year, so that the land does not become desolate and the wild animals of the field multiply against you. 30 Little by little I will drive them out from before you, until you become fruitful and take possession of the land.31 “I will set your boundary from the Red Sea to the sea of the Phi·lisʹtines and from the wilderness to the River; for I will give the inhabitants of the land into your hand, and you will drive them out from before you. 32 You must not make a covenant with them or their gods. 33 They should not dwell in your land, so that they may not cause you to sin against me. If you should serve their gods, it would surely become a snare to you.”
24 Then he said to Moses: “Go up to Jehovah, you and Aaron, Naʹdab and A·biʹhu, and 70 of the elders of Israel, and bow down from a distance. 2 Moses should approach Jehovah by himself; but the others should not approach, and the people should not go up with him.”3 Then Moses came and related to the people all the words of Jehovah and all the judicial decisions, and all the people answered with one voice: “All the words that Jehovah has spoken, we are willing to do.” 4 So Moses wrote down all the words of Jehovah. Then he got up early in the morning and built at the foot of the mountain an altar and 12 pillars corresponding to the 12 tribes of Israel. 5 After that he sent young Israelite men, and they offered up burnt offerings and sacrificed bulls as communion sacrifices to Jehovah. 6 Then Moses took half of the blood and put it in bowls, and half of the blood he sprinkled on the altar. 7 Then he took the book of the covenant and read it aloud to the people. And they said: “All that Jehovah has spoken we are willing to do, and we will be obedient.” 8 So Moses took the blood and sprinkled it on the people and said: “This is the blood of the covenant that Jehovah has made with you in harmony with all these words.”9 Moses and Aaron, Naʹdab and A·biʹhu, and 70 of the elders of Israel went up, 10 and they saw the God of Israel. Under his feet was what seemed like a sapphire pavement, and it was as pure as the heavens themselves. 11 He did not harm the distinguished men of Israel, and they saw a vision of the true God and ate and drank.12 Jehovah now said to Moses: “Come up to me on the mountain and stay there. I will give you the stone tablets with the law and the commandment that I will write for their instruction.” 13 So Moses got up with his attendant Joshua, and Moses went up the mountain of the true God. 14 But to the elders he had said: “Wait here for us until we return to you. You have Aaron and Hur with you. Whoever has a legal case may go to them.” 15 Then Moses went up the mountain while the cloud was covering it.16 Jehovah’s glory remained on Mount Siʹnai, and the cloud covered it for six days. On the seventh day he called to Moses from the midst of the cloud. 17 To the Israelites who were watching, the appearance of Jehovah’s glory was like a consuming fire on the mountaintop. 18 Moses then entered into the cloud and went up the mountain. And Moses stayed on the mountain 40 days and 40 nights.
25 Jehovah then said to Moses: 2 “Tell the people of Israel to take up a contribution for me; from every person whose heart moves him, you are to take up my contribution. 3 This is the contribution that you are to accept from them: gold, silver, copper, 4 blue thread, purple wool, scarlet material, fine linen, goat hair, 5 ram skins dyed red, sealskins, acacia wood, 6 oil for the lamps, balsam for the anointing oil and the perfumed incense, 7 and onyx stones and other stones to be set in the ephʹod and the breastpiece. 8 They are to make a sanctuary for me, and I will reside among them. 9 You are to make it, the tabernacle and all its furnishings, following exactly the pattern that I am showing you.10 “They are to make an ark of acacia wood, two and a half cubits long and a cubit and a half wide and a cubit and a half high. 11 Then you will overlay it with pure gold. Inside and outside you are to overlay it, and you will make a border of gold all around it. 12 And you will cast four rings of gold for it and attach them above its four feet, with two rings on one side and two rings on the other side. 13 And you will make poles of acacia wood and overlay them with gold. 14 You will put the poles through the rings on the sides of the Ark in order to carry the Ark with them. 15 The poles will stay in the rings of the Ark; they are not to be removed from it. 16 You will place in the Ark the Testimony that I will give you.17 “You will make a cover of pure gold, two and a half cubits long and a cubit and a half wide. 18 You are to make two cherubs of gold; you will make them of hammered work on the two ends of the cover. 19 Make the cherubs on the two ends, one cherub on each end of the cover. 20 The cherubs are to spread out their two wings upward, overshadowing the cover with their wings, and they will face each other. The faces of the cherubs will be turned toward the cover. 21 You will put the cover on the Ark, and in the Ark you will place the Testimony that I will give you. 22 I will present myself to you there and speak with you from above the cover. From between the two cherubs that are on the ark of the Testimony, I will make known to you all that I will command you for the Israelites.23 “You will also make a table of acacia wood, two cubits long and a cubit wide and a cubit and a half high. 24 You will overlay it with pure gold and make a golden border around it. 25 You will make a rim around it a handbreadth wide and a border of gold to go around the rim. 26 You will make for it four rings of gold and place the rings on the four corners, where the four legs are attached. 27 The rings are to be close to the rim as holders for the poles for carrying the table. 28 You will make the poles of acacia wood and overlay them with gold and carry the table with them.29 “You will also make its dishes, its cups, its pitchers, and its bowls from which they will pour drink offerings. You are to make them out of pure gold. 30 And you will put the showbread on the table before me constantly.31 “You will make a lampstand of pure gold. The lampstand is to be made of hammered work. Its base, its stem, its branches, its cups, its knobs, and its blossoms will be one piece. 32 And six branches will extend out from the sides of the lampstand, three branches from one side and three branches from the other side. 33 Three cups shaped like almond flowers will be on the one set of branches, with knobs and blossoms alternating, and three cups shaped like almond flowers on the other set of branches, with knobs and blossoms alternating. This is how the six branches will extend out from the stem of the lampstand. 34 On the stem of the lampstand are four cups shaped like almond flowers, with its knobs and its blossoms alternating. 35 A knob will be under the first two branches that extend out of the stem and a knob under the next two branches and a knob under the next two branches, for the six branches extending out from the stem. 36 The knobs and the branches and the whole lampstand are to be one piece of pure, hammered gold. 37 You will make seven lamps for it, and when the lamps are lit, they will shine on the area in front of it. 38 Its snuffers and its fire holders are to be of pure gold. 39 It should be made, along with these utensils, from a talent of pure gold. 40 See that you make them after their pattern that was shown to you on the mountain.
26 “You are to make the tabernacle with ten tent cloths of fine twisted linen, blue thread, purple wool, and scarlet material. You are to make them with embroidered cherub designs. 2 Each tent cloth will be 28 cubits long and 4 cubits wide. All the tent cloths are to be the same size. 3 Five tent cloths are to be joined one to another to form a series, and the other five tent cloths will be joined in a series. 4 You will make loops of blue thread on the edge of the one tent cloth at the end of the series, and you are to do the same on the outermost edge of the other set where it will join. 5 You will make 50 loops on the one tent cloth and 50 loops on the edge of the other tent cloth so that they will be opposite each other where they join. 6 You are to make 50 gold clasps and join the tent cloths together with the clasps, and the tabernacle will form one unit.7 “You will also make cloths of goat hair for the tent over the tabernacle. You will make 11 tent cloths. 8 Each tent cloth will be 30 cubits long and 4 cubits wide. All 11 tent cloths are to be the same size. 9 You are to join five of the tent cloths together and join the other six tent cloths together, and you are to fold over the sixth tent cloth at the front of the tent. 10 And you are to make 50 loops on the edge of the one tent cloth, the outermost one in the series, and 50 loops on the edge of the tent cloth at the other place where they join. 11 You are to make 50 copper clasps and put the clasps in the loops and join the tent together, and it will become one unit. 12 The remaining part of the tent cloths will serve as an overhanging. Half of the tent cloth that remains will hang over the back of the tabernacle. 13 The remaining length of the cloths of the tent will serve as an overhanging for the tabernacle by one cubit on each side, in order to cover it.14 “You will also make a covering for the tent of ram skins dyed red and over that a covering of sealskins.15 “You will make the panel frames for the tabernacle out of acacia wood standing upright. 16 Each panel frame is to be ten cubits high and a cubit and a half wide. 17 Each panel frame has two tenons joined to each other. That is how you should make all the panel frames of the tabernacle. 18 You are to make 20 panel frames for the south side of the tabernacle, facing south.19 “You will make 40 silver socket pedestals under the 20 panel frames: two socket pedestals under the one panel frame for its two tenons and two socket pedestals under each following panel frame for its two tenons. 20 For the other side of the tabernacle, the northern side, make 20 panel frames 21 and their 40 silver socket pedestals, two socket pedestals under one panel frame and two socket pedestals under each following panel frame. 22 For the rear section of the tabernacle to the west, you will make six panel frames. 23 You will make two panel frames to serve as the two rear corner posts of the tabernacle. 24 They should be doubled from the bottom to the top, up to the first ring. This should be done for both of them, and they will form the two corner posts. 25 And there will be eight panel frames and their 16 silver socket pedestals, two socket pedestals under the one panel frame and two socket pedestals under each following panel frame.26 “You will make bars of acacia wood, five for the panel frames of the one side of the tabernacle, 27 and five bars for the panel frames of the other side of the tabernacle, and five bars for the panel frames of the side of the tabernacle to the west, for the rear section. 28 The middle bar that runs along the center of the panel frames should extend from end to end.29 “You will overlay the panel frames with gold, and you will make their rings of gold as holders for the bars, and you will overlay the bars with gold. 30 You must set up the tabernacle according to its plan that you were shown in the mountain.31 “You are to make a curtain of blue thread, purple wool, scarlet material, and fine twisted linen. It will be made with cherubs embroidered on it. 32 You will hang it on four pillars of acacia overlaid with gold. Their hooks are to be of gold. The pillars are set on four socket pedestals of silver. 33 You will hang the curtain under the clasps and bring the ark of the Testimony there within the curtain. The curtain will make a division for you between the Holy and the Most Holy. 34 You must put the cover on the ark of the Testimony in the Most Holy.35 “You will place the table outside the curtain, with the lampstand opposite the table on the south side of the tabernacle; and the table you will put on the north side. 36 You will make a screen for the entrance of the tent out of blue thread, purple wool, scarlet material, and fine twisted linen woven together. 37 You will make five pillars of acacia for the screen and overlay them with gold. Their hooks are to be of gold, and you will cast five socket pedestals of copper for them.
27 “You will make the altar of acacia wood; it will be five cubits long and five cubits wide. The altar should be square and three cubits high. 2 You will make horns on its four corners; the horns will be part of the altar, and you will overlay the altar with copper. 3 You will make buckets for clearing away its ashes, along with shovels, bowls, forks, and fire holders, and you will make all its utensils of copper. 4 You will make a grating for the altar, a network of copper, and on the network four rings of copper at its four corners. 5 You will set it down below the rim of the altar, and the network will extend partway down into the altar. 6 You will make poles of acacia wood for the altar and overlay them with copper. 7 The poles will be inserted into the rings so that the poles are on the two sides of the altar when it is carried. 8 You will make the altar in the form of a hollow chest of planks. It should be made just as He showed you on the mountain.9 “You will make the courtyard of the tabernacle. For the south side, facing south, the courtyard will have hanging curtains of fine twisted linen, 100 cubits long for the one side. 10 It will have 20 pillars with 20 copper socket pedestals. The hooks of the pillars and their connectors are of silver. 11 The hanging curtains for the north side will also be 100 cubits long, along with its 20 pillars and their 20 copper socket pedestals, with silver hooks and connectors for the pillars. 12 There are to be hanging curtains on the west side for 50 cubits across the width of the courtyard, with ten pillars and ten socket pedestals. 13 The width of the courtyard on the east side toward the sunrise is 50 cubits. 14 There will be 15 cubits of hanging curtains on the one side, with three pillars and three socket pedestals. 15 And for the other side, there will be 15 cubits of hanging curtains, with three pillars and three socket pedestals.16 “The entrance of the courtyard should have a screen 20 cubits long made of blue thread, purple wool, scarlet material, and fine twisted linen woven together, with four pillars and their four socket pedestals. 17 All the pillars surrounding the courtyard will have silver fasteners and silver hooks, but their socket pedestals will be of copper. 18 The courtyard is to be 100 cubits long, 50 cubits wide, and 5 cubits high, made from fine twisted linen, and it should have copper socket pedestals. 19 All the utensils and the items used in the service of the tabernacle, as well as its tent pins and all the pins of the courtyard, are to be of copper.20 “You are to command the Israelites to bring you pure, beaten olive oil for the lighting, in order to keep the lamps burning constantly. 21 In the tent of meeting, outside the curtain that is near the Testimony, Aaron and his sons will arrange to keep the lamps lit from evening until morning before Jehovah. It is a lasting statute for all their generations to be carried out by the Israelites.
28 “You are to summon from the Israelites your brother Aaron, along with his sons, so that he may serve as priest to me—Aaron, along with Naʹdab and A·biʹhu, El·e·aʹzar and Ithʹa·mar, the sons of Aaron. 2 You are to make holy garments for Aaron your brother, for glory and beauty. 3 You are to speak to all those who are skillful, those whom I have filled with the spirit of wisdom, and they will make Aaron’s garments for his sanctification, so that he may serve as priest to me.4 “These are the garments that they will make: a breastpiece, an ephʹod, a sleeveless coat, a checkered robe, a turban, and a sash; they will make these holy garments for your brother Aaron and his sons, so that he may serve as priest to me. 5 The skilled workers will use the gold, the blue thread, the purple wool, the scarlet material, and the fine linen.6 “They are to make the ephʹod of gold, blue thread, purple wool, scarlet material, and fine twisted linen, and it should be embroidered. 7 It is to have two attached shoulder pieces that join it at its two edges. 8 The woven belt, which is attached to the ephʹod for tying it securely in position, should be of the same materials: gold, blue thread, purple wool, scarlet material, and fine twisted linen.9 “You are to take two onyx stones and engrave on them the names of the sons of Israel, 10 six names on the one stone and the six remaining names on the other stone, in the order of their births. 11 A stone engraver will engrave the names of the sons of Israel on the two stones as he would engrave a seal. Then you are to have them mounted in gold settings. 12 You are to put the two stones on the shoulder pieces of the ephʹod as memorial stones for the sons of Israel, and Aaron must carry their names before Jehovah on his two shoulder pieces as a memorial. 13 You are to make settings of gold 14 and two chains of pure gold twisted like a cord, and you must attach the corded chains to the settings.15 “You are to have an embroiderer make the breastpiece of judgment. It should be made like the ephʹod, out of gold, blue thread, purple wool, scarlet material, and fine twisted linen. 16 It should be square when doubled, a span long and a span wide. 17 You should set in it mounted stones, four rows of stones. The first row is ruby, topaz, and emerald. 18 The second row is turquoise, sapphire, and jasper. 19 The third row is leshʹem stone, agate, and amethyst. 20 The fourth row is chrysʹo·lite, onyx, and jade. They should be mounted in settings of gold. 21 The stones will correspond to the names of the 12 sons of Israel. Each one should be engraved like a seal, each name representing one of the 12 tribes.22 “You are to make wreathed chains on the breastpiece, like cords of pure gold. 23 You are to make two rings of gold for the breastpiece and attach the two rings to the two ends of the breastpiece. 24 You are to put the two cords of gold through the two rings at the ends of the breastpiece. 25 You will put the two ends of the two cords through the two settings, and you must attach them to the shoulder pieces of the ephʹod, at the front. 26 You are to make two rings of gold and set them at the two ends on the inside edge of the breastpiece, facing the ephʹod. 27 You should make two more rings of gold on the front of the ephʹod, below the two shoulder pieces, close to where it is joined, above the woven belt of the ephʹod. 28 The breastpiece should be held in place by a blue cord, tying its rings to the rings of the ephʹod. This will keep the breastpiece in place on the ephʹod, above the woven belt.29 “Aaron must carry the names of the sons of Israel on the breastpiece of judgment over his heart when he comes into the Holy as a constant memorial before Jehovah. 30 You will put the Uʹrim and the Thumʹmim into the breastpiece of judgment, and they must be over Aaron’s heart when he comes in before Jehovah, and Aaron must carry the means for making judgments of the Israelites over his heart before Jehovah constantly.31 “You are to make the sleeveless coat of the ephʹod entirely of blue thread. 32 There will be an opening at the top in the middle of it. Its opening should have a border woven all around it by a loom worker. It should be like the opening of a coat of mail, so that it will not be torn. 33 You should make pomegranates of blue thread, purple wool, and scarlet material all around its hem, along with bells of gold in between them. 34 You should alternate a bell of gold and a pomegranate, a bell of gold and a pomegranate, all around the hem of the sleeveless coat. 35 It must be worn by Aaron so that he may minister, and the sound from it must be heard when he goes into the sanctuary before Jehovah and when he comes out, so that he will not die.36 “You are to make a shining plate of pure gold and engrave on it as one would engrave a seal: ‘Holiness belongs to Jehovah.’ 37 You must fasten it to the turban with a blue cord; it is to remain on the front of the turban. 38 It will be on Aaron’s forehead, and Aaron will bear responsibility when someone commits an error against the holy things, which the Israelites sanctify when they offer them as holy gifts. It must always remain on his forehead, so that they may gain approval before Jehovah.39 “You are to weave the checkered robe of fine linen, make a turban of fine linen, and make a woven sash.40 “You will also make robes, sashes, and headgear for Aaron’s sons, for glory and beauty. 41 You will clothe your brother Aaron and his sons with him, and you are to anoint them and install them and sanctify them, and they will serve as priests to me. 42 Also make linen shorts for them to cover their naked flesh. These are to extend from the hips to the thighs. 43 These must be worn by Aaron and his sons when they come into the tent of meeting or when they approach the altar to minister in the holy place, so that they may not incur guilt and die. It is a permanent statute for him and his offspring after him.
29 “This is what you are to do to sanctify them to serve as priests to me: Take a young bull, two unblemished rams, 2 unleavened bread, unleavened ring-shaped loaves mixed with oil, and unleavened wafers spread with oil. You are to make them with fine wheat flour 3 and put them in a basket and present them in the basket, along with the bull and the two rams.4 “You will present Aaron and his sons at the entrance of the tent of meeting and wash them with water. 5 Then you are to take the garments and clothe Aaron with the robe, the sleeveless coat of the ephʹod, the ephʹod, and the breastpiece, and you are to tie the woven belt of the ephʹod securely around his waist. 6 You will put the turban on his head and put the holy sign of dedication on the turban; 7 and take the anointing oil and pour it on his head and anoint him.8 “Then bring his sons forward and clothe them with the robes 9 and wrap the sashes around them, Aaron as well as his sons, and put on their headgear; and the priesthood will become theirs as a permanent statute. This is how you should install Aaron and his sons to serve as priests.10 “You are now to present the bull before the tent of meeting, and Aaron and his sons will lay their hands on the bull’s head. 11 Slaughter the bull before Jehovah, at the entrance of the tent of meeting. 12 Take some of the bull’s blood on your finger and put it on the horns of the altar, and pour out all the rest of the blood at the base of the altar. 13 Then take all the fat that covers the intestines, the appendage on the liver, and the two kidneys and the fat that is on them, and burn them so that they smoke on the altar. 14 But the bull’s flesh and its skin and its dung, you will burn with fire outside the camp. It is a sin offering.15 “Then take the one ram, and Aaron and his sons are to lay their hands on the ram’s head. 16 Slaughter the ram and take its blood and sprinkle it on all sides of the altar. 17 Cut the ram into its pieces, and wash its intestines and its shanks, and arrange the pieces together with its head. 18 You must burn the entire ram, making it smoke on the altar. It is a burnt offering to Jehovah, a pleasing aroma. It is an offering made by fire to Jehovah.19 “Next you are to take the other ram, and Aaron and his sons are to lay their hands on the ram’s head. 20 Slaughter the ram and take some of its blood and put it on Aaron’s right earlobe and on his sons’ right earlobe and on the thumb of their right hand and the big toe of their right foot, and sprinkle the blood on all sides of the altar. 21 Then take some of the blood that is on the altar and some of the anointing oil and spatter it on Aaron and his garments and on his sons and his sons’ garments, so that he and his garments and his sons and their garments may be holy.22 “Then take from the ram the fat, the fat tail, the fat that covers the intestines, the appendage of the liver, the two kidneys and the fat that is on them, and the right leg, for it is a ram of installation. 23 Take also a round loaf of bread and a ring-shaped loaf of oiled bread and a wafer out of the basket of unleavened bread that is before Jehovah. 24 You must place them all in the hands of Aaron and in the hands of his sons, and you are to wave them back and forth as a wave offering before Jehovah. 25 Then you will take them out of their hands and burn them on the altar, on top of the burnt offering, as a pleasing aroma before Jehovah. It is an offering made by fire to Jehovah.26 “Then take the breast of the ram of installation, which is offered in behalf of Aaron, and wave it back and forth as a wave offering before Jehovah, and it will become your portion. 27 You are to sanctify the breast of the wave offering and the leg of the sacred portion that was waved and that was taken from the ram of installation, from what was offered for Aaron and for his sons. 28 It is to become Aaron’s and his sons’ by a permanent regulation to be carried out by the Israelites, for it is a sacred portion, and it will become a sacred portion to be given by the Israelites. It is their sacred portion for Jehovah from their communion sacrifices.29 “The holy garments that belong to Aaron will be used by his sons after him when they are anointed and installed as priests. 30 The priest from among his sons who succeeds him and who comes into the tent of meeting to minister in the holy place will wear them for seven days.31 “You will take the ram of installation and boil its flesh in a holy place. 32 Aaron and his sons will eat the flesh of the ram and the bread that is in the basket at the entrance of the tent of meeting. 33 They are to eat the things with which atonement was made to install them as priests and to sanctify them. But an unauthorized person may not eat them, for they are something holy. 34 If any of the flesh of the installation sacrifice and of the bread is left over until the morning, then you must burn what is left with fire. It must not be eaten, for it is something holy.35 “You are to do this way to Aaron and his sons, according to all that I have commanded you. You will take seven days to install them as priests. 36 You will offer the bull of the sin offering daily for an atonement, and you are to purify the altar from sin by making atonement for it, and you must anoint it to sanctify it. 37 You will take seven days to make atonement for the altar, and you must sanctify it so that it may become a most holy altar. Anyone who touches the altar is to be holy.38 “This is what you will offer on the altar: two one-year-old rams each day, continually. 39 Offer the one young ram in the morning and the other ram at twilight. 40 A tenth part of an eʹphah measure of fine flour mixed with a fourth of a hin of beaten oil, and a drink offering of a fourth of a hin of wine, will go for the first young ram. 41 You will offer the second young ram at twilight, along with the same grain and drink offerings as in the morning. You will render it as a pleasing aroma, an offering made by fire to Jehovah. 42 It is to be a regular burnt offering throughout your generations at the entrance of the tent of meeting before Jehovah, where I will present myself to you to speak to you there.43 “I will present myself there to the Israelites, and it will be sanctified by my glory. 44 I will sanctify the tent of meeting and the altar, and I will sanctify Aaron and his sons so that they may serve as priests to me. 45 I will reside among the people of Israel, and I will be their God. 46 And they will certainly know that I am Jehovah their God, who brought them out of the land of Egypt so that I may reside among them. I am Jehovah their God.
3 Moses became a shepherd of the flock of his father-in-law Jethʹro, the priest of Midʹi·an. While he was leading the flock to the west side of the wilderness, he eventually came to the mountain of the true God, to Hoʹreb. 2 Then Jehovah’s angel appeared to him in a flame of fire in the midst of a thornbush. As he kept looking, he saw that the thornbush was on fire, and yet the thornbush was not consumed. 3 So Moses said: “I will go over to inspect this unusual sight to see why the thornbush does not burn up.” 4 When Jehovah saw that he went over to look, God called to him out of the thornbush and said: “Moses! Moses!” to which he said: “Here I am.” 5 Then he said: “Do not come any nearer. Remove your sandals from your feet, because the place where you are standing is holy ground.”6 He went on to say: “I am the God of your father, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob.” Then Moses hid his face, because he was afraid to look at the true God. 7 Jehovah added: “I have certainly seen the affliction of my people who are in Egypt, and I have heard their outcry because of those who force them to work; I well know the pains they suffer. 8 I will go down to rescue them out of the hand of the Egyptians and to bring them up out of that land to a land good and spacious, a land flowing with milk and honey, the territory of the Caʹnaan·ites, the Hitʹtites, the Amʹor·ites, the Perʹiz·zites, the Hiʹvites, and the Jebʹu·sites. 9 Now look! The outcry of the people of Israel has reached me, and I have seen also the harsh way that the Egyptians are oppressing them. 10 Now come, I will send you to Pharʹaoh, and you will bring my people the Israelites out of Egypt.”11 However, Moses said to the true God: “Who am I that I should go to Pharʹaoh and bring the Israelites out of Egypt?” 12 To this he said: “I will prove to be with you, and this is the sign for you that it was I who sent you: After you have brought the people out of Egypt, you people will serve the true God on this mountain.”13 But Moses said to the true God: “Suppose I go to the Israelites and say to them, ‘The God of your forefathers has sent me to you,’ and they say to me, ‘What is his name?’ What should I say to them?” 14 So God said to Moses: “I Will Become What I Choose to Become.” And he added: “This is what you are to say to the Israelites, ‘I Will Become has sent me to you.’” 15 Then God said once more to Moses:“This is what you are to say to the Israelites, ‘Jehovah the God of your forefathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, has sent me to you.’ This is my name forever, and this is how I am to be remembered from generation to generation. 16 Now go, and gather the elders of Israel and say to them, ‘Jehovah the God of your forefathers has appeared to me, the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and he said: “I have certainly taken notice of you and of what is being done to you in Egypt. 17 So I say, I will take you away from affliction at the hands of the Egyptians to the land of the Caʹnaan·ites, the Hitʹtites, the Amʹor·ites, the Perʹiz·zites, the Hiʹvites, and the Jebʹu·sites, to a land flowing with milk and honey.”’18 “They will certainly listen to your voice, and you will go, you and the elders of Israel, to the king of Egypt, and you men should say to him: ‘Jehovah the God of the Hebrews has communicated with us. So, please, let us make a three-day journey into the wilderness so that we may sacrifice to Jehovah our God.’ 19 But I myself well know that the king of Egypt will not give you permission to go unless a mighty hand compels him. 20 So I will have to stretch out my hand and strike Egypt with all my extraordinary acts that I will do in it, and after that he will send you out. 21 And I will give this people favor in the eyes of the Egyptians, and when you go, you will by no means go empty-handed. 22 Each woman must ask her neighbor and the woman lodging in her house for articles of silver and of gold as well as clothing, and you will put them on your sons and your daughters; and you will plunder the Egyptians.”
30 “You are to make an altar as a place for burning incense; you will make it of acacia wood. 2 It should be square, one cubit long, one cubit wide, and two cubits high. Its horns will be one piece with it. 3 You are to overlay it with pure gold: its top surface, its sides all around, and its horns; and you are to make a gold border around it. 4 You will also make two rings of gold for it below its border on two opposite sides, and these will hold the poles used to carry it. 5 Make the poles of acacia wood and overlay them with gold. 6 You are to put it before the curtain that is near the ark of the Testimony, before the cover that is over the Testimony, where I will present myself to you.7 “Aaron will burn perfumed incense on it, making it smoke on the altar when he maintains the lamps each morning. 8 Also, when Aaron lights the lamps at twilight, he will burn the incense. It is a regular incense offering before Jehovah throughout your generations. 9 You must not offer on it unauthorized incense or a burnt offering or a grain offering, and you must not pour a drink offering on it. 10 Aaron must make atonement on its horns once a year. With some of the blood of the sin offering of the atonement, he will make atonement for it once a year throughout your generations. It is most holy to Jehovah.”11 Then Jehovah said to Moses: 12 “Whenever you take a census and count the sons of Israel, each one must give a ransom for his life to Jehovah at the time of the census. This is so that no plague may be brought upon them when they are registered. 13 This is what all those who are registered will give: a half shekel by the standard shekel of the holy place. Twenty geʹrahs equal a shekel. A half shekel is the contribution to Jehovah. 14 Everyone registered who is 20 years old and up will give Jehovah’s contribution. 15 The rich should not give more and the poor should not give less than the half shekel as a contribution to Jehovah to make atonement for your lives. 16 You are to take the silver money of the atonement from the Israelites and give it in behalf of the service of the tent of meeting, that it may serve as a remembrance before Jehovah for the Israelites, to make atonement for your lives.”17 Jehovah spoke further to Moses, saying: 18 “Make a copper basin and its stand for washing; then place it between the tent of meeting and the altar and put water into it. 19 Aaron and his sons will wash their hands and their feet there. 20 When they go into the tent of meeting or when they approach the altar to minister and to make offerings of fire and smoke to Jehovah, they will wash with water so that they do not die. 21 They must wash their hands and their feet so that they may not die, and it must serve as a permanent regulation for them, for him and his offspring, throughout their generations.”22 Jehovah continued to speak to Moses: 23 “Next, take the choicest perfumes: 500 units of solidified myrrh, and half that amount, 250 units, of sweet cinnamon, 250 units of sweet calamus, 24 and 500 units of cassia, measured by the standard shekel of the holy place, along with a hin of olive oil. 25 Then make out of it a holy anointing oil; it should be skillfully blended together. It is to be a holy anointing oil.26 “You are to anoint the tent of meeting and the ark of the Testimony with it, 27 as well as the table and all its utensils, the lampstand and its utensils, the altar of incense, 28 the altar of burnt offering and all its utensils, and the basin and its stand. 29 You must sanctify them that they may become most holy. Anyone touching them is to be holy. 30 And you will anoint Aaron and his sons and sanctify them to serve as priests to me.31 “You will speak to the Israelites, saying, ‘This is to continue as a holy anointing oil to me during your generations. 32 It is not to be applied to the flesh of mankind, and you must not make anything with a composition like it. It is something holy. It is to continue as something holy for you. 33 Anyone who makes an ointment like it and who puts some of it on an unauthorized person must be cut off from his people.’”34 Then Jehovah said to Moses: “Take equal portions of these perfumes: stacte drops, onycha, perfumed galbanum, and pure frankincense. 35 Make it into an incense; the spice mixture should be skillfully blended, salted, pure, and holy. 36 You are to pound some of it into fine powder and put some of it before the Testimony in the tent of meeting, where I will present myself to you. It should be most holy to you. 37 You must not make for your own use the incense that you make with this composition. You are to regard it as something holy to Jehovah. 38 Whoever makes any like it to enjoy its smell must be cut off from his people.”
31 Jehovah continued to speak to Moses, saying: 2 “See, I have chosen Bezʹal·el the son of Uʹri the son of Hur of the tribe of Judah. 3 I will fill him with the spirit of God, giving him wisdom, understanding, and knowledge of every kind of craftsmanship, 4 for making artistic designs, for working with gold, silver, and copper, 5 for cutting and setting stones, and for making every kind of wood product. 6 Moreover, to assist him I have appointed O·hoʹli·ab the son of A·hisʹa·mach of the tribe of Dan, and I am putting wisdom into the heart of all those who are skillful, so that they may make everything I have commanded you: 7 the tent of meeting, the ark of the Testimony and the cover that is on it, all the utensils of the tent, 8 the table and its utensils, the lampstand of pure gold and all its utensils, the altar of incense, 9 the altar of burnt offering and all its utensils, the basin and its stand, 10 the finely woven garments, the holy garments for Aaron the priest, the garments of his sons to serve as priests, 11 the anointing oil, and the perfumed incense for the sanctuary. They will do everything I have commanded you.”12 Jehovah said further to Moses: 13 “Speak to the Israelites and tell them, ‘Especially, you are to keep my sabbaths, for it is a sign between me and you during your generations in order that you may know that I, Jehovah, am sanctifying you. 14 You must keep the Sabbath, for it is something holy to you. Whoever profanes it must be put to death. If anyone does any work on it, then that person must be cut off from among his people. 15 Six days work may be done, but on the seventh day is a sabbath of complete rest. It is something holy to Jehovah. Anyone doing work on the Sabbath day must be put to death. 16 The Israelites must keep the Sabbath; they must observe the Sabbath during all their generations. It is a lasting covenant. 17 It is an enduring sign between me and the people of Israel, for in six days Jehovah made the heavens and the earth and on the seventh day he rested and refreshed himself.’”18 Now as soon as he had finished speaking with him on Mount Siʹnai, he gave Moses two tablets of the Testimony, tablets of stone written on by God’s finger.
32 Meanwhile, the people saw that Moses was taking a long time coming down from the mountain. So the people gathered around Aaron and said to him: “Get up, make for us a god who will go ahead of us, because we do not know what has happened to this Moses, the man who led us up out of the land of Egypt.” 2 At this Aaron said to them: “Take the gold earrings from the ears of your wives, your sons, and your daughters and bring them to me.” 3 So all the people began taking off the gold earrings that were in their ears and bringing them to Aaron. 4 Then he took the gold from them, and he formed it with an engraving tool and made it into a statue of a calf. They began to say: “This is your God, O Israel, who led you up out of the land of Egypt.”5 When Aaron saw this, he built an altar before it. Then Aaron called out: “There is a festival to Jehovah tomorrow.” 6 So they got up early on the next day and began offering up burnt offerings and presenting communion sacrifices. After that the people sat down to eat and drink. Then they got up to have a good time.7 Jehovah now said to Moses: “Go, descend, because your people, whom you led up out of the land of Egypt, have corrupted themselves. 8 They have quickly deviated from the way I commanded them to go. They have made for themselves a statue of a calf, and they keep bowing down to it and sacrificing to it and saying, ‘This is your God, O Israel, who led you up out of the land of Egypt.’” 9 Jehovah went on to say to Moses: “I have seen that this is an obstinate people. 10 So now let me be, and I will exterminate them in my burning anger, and let me make a great nation from you instead.”11 Then Moses appealed to Jehovah his God and said: “Why, O Jehovah, should you turn your burning anger against your people after bringing them out of the land of Egypt with great power and with a mighty hand? 12 Why should the Egyptians say, ‘He had evil intentions when he led them out. He wanted to kill them in the mountains and exterminate them from the surface of the earth’? Turn from your burning anger and reconsider your decision to bring this calamity on your people. 13 Remember your servants Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, to whom you swore by yourself and said: ‘I will multiply your offspring like the stars of the heavens, and I will give all this land that I have designated to your offspring, so that they may take it as a permanent possession.’”14 So Jehovah began to reconsider the calamity that he had spoken of bringing on his people.15 Moses then turned and went down from the mountain with the two tablets of the Testimony in his hand. The tablets were inscribed on both sides; they were written on the front and on the back. 16 The tablets were the workmanship of God, and the writing was the writing of God engraved on the tablets. 17 When Joshua began to hear the noise of the people because of their shouting, he said to Moses: “There is the sound of battle in the camp.” 18 But Moses said:“It is not the sound of singing over a victory,And it is not the sound of wailing over a defeat;I hear the sound of another kind of singing.”19 As soon as Moses got near the camp and saw the calf and the dances, his anger began to blaze, and he threw the tablets from his hands and shattered them at the foot of the mountain. 20 He took the calf that they had made and he burned it with fire and crushed it into powder; then he scattered it on the water and made the Israelites drink it. 21 And Moses said to Aaron: “What did this people do to you that you have brought a great sin upon them?” 22 Aaron replied: “Do not be enraged, my lord. You well know that the people are inclined to do evil. 23 So they said to me, ‘Make for us a god who will go ahead of us, for we do not know what has happened to this Moses, the man who led us up out of the land of Egypt.’ 24 So I said to them, ‘Whoever has any gold must take it off and give it to me.’ Then I threw it into the fire and out came this calf.”25 Moses saw that the people were unrestrained, for Aaron had let them go unrestrained, so that they were a disgrace before their opposers. 26 Then Moses took his position in the gate of the camp and said: “Who is on Jehovah’s side? Come to me!” And all the Levites gathered around him. 27 He now said to them: “This is what Jehovah the God of Israel has said, ‘Each of you must fasten on his sword and pass through all the camp from gate to gate, killing his brother, his neighbor, and his close companion.’” 28 The Levites did what Moses said. So about 3,000 men were killed on that day. 29 Then Moses said: “Set yourselves apart for Jehovah today, for each of you has gone against his own son and his own brother; today he will give you a blessing.”30 On the very next day, Moses said to the people: “You committed a very great sin, and now I will go up to Jehovah to see if I can make amends for your sin.” 31 So Moses returned to Jehovah and said: “What a great sin this people has committed! They made themselves a god of gold! 32 But now if you are willing, pardon their sin; if not, please wipe me out from your book that you have written.” 33 However, Jehovah said to Moses: “Whoever has sinned against me, I will wipe him out of my book. 34 Go now, lead the people to the place about which I have spoken to you. Look! My angel will go ahead of you, and on the day when I make an accounting, I will bring punishment on them for their sin.” 35 Then Jehovah began plaguing the people because they had made the calf, the one that Aaron had made.
33 Jehovah said further to Moses: “Go on your way from here with the people whom you led up out of the land of Egypt. Journey to the land about which I swore to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, saying, ‘To your offspring I will give it.’ 2 I will send an angel ahead of you and drive out the Caʹnaan·ites, the Amʹor·ites, the Hitʹtites, the Perʹiz·zites, the Hiʹvites, and the Jebʹu·sites. 3 Go up to a land flowing with milk and honey. But I will not go in the midst of you, for you are an obstinate people, and I might exterminate you on the way.”4 When the people heard this harsh word, they began to mourn, and not one of them put on his ornaments. 5 Jehovah said to Moses: “Say to the Israelites, ‘You are an obstinate people. In one moment I could go through the midst of you and exterminate you. So now keep your ornaments off while I consider what to do to you.’” 6 So from Mount Hoʹreb onward, the Israelites refrained from wearing their ornaments.7 Now Moses took his tent and pitched it outside the camp, at some distance from the camp, and he called it a tent of meeting. Everyone inquiring of Jehovah would go out to the tent of meeting, which was outside the camp. 8 As soon as Moses went out to the tent, all the people would rise and stand at the entrance of their own tents, and they would gaze after Moses until he entered into the tent. 9 As soon as Moses would go into the tent, the pillar of cloud would come down and stand at the entrance of the tent while God spoke with Moses. 10 When all the people saw the pillar of cloud standing at the entrance of the tent, each of them rose and bowed down at the entrance of his own tent. 11 Jehovah spoke to Moses face-to-face, just as one man would speak to another man. When he returned to the camp, Joshua the son of Nun, his minister and attendant, would not depart from the tent.12 Now Moses said to Jehovah: “See, you are saying to me, ‘Lead this people up,’ but you have not let me know whom you will send with me. Moreover, you have said, ‘I know you by name, and you have also found favor in my eyes.’ 13 Please, if I have found favor in your eyes, make me know your ways, so that I may know you and continue to find favor in your eyes. Consider, too, that this nation is your people.” 14 So he said: “I myself will go with you, and I will give you rest.” 15 Then Moses said to him: “If you yourself are not going along, do not lead us up from here. 16 How will it be known that I have found favor in your eyes, I and your people? Is it not by your going along with us, so that I and your people will be distinguished from every other people on the face of the earth?”17 Jehovah went on to say to Moses: “I will also do this thing that you request, because you have found favor in my eyes and I know you by name.” 18 Then he said: “Please show me your glory.” 19 But he said: “I will make all my goodness pass before your face, and I will declare before you the name of Jehovah; and I will favor the one whom I favor, and I will show mercy to the one to whom I show mercy.” 20 But he added: “You cannot see my face, for no man can see me and live.”21 Jehovah said further: “Here is a place near me. Station yourself on the rock. 22 When my glory is passing by, I will place you in a crevice of the rock, and I will shield you with my hand until I have passed by. 23 After that I will take my hand away, and you will see my back. But my face may not be seen.”
34 Then Jehovah said to Moses: “Carve out for yourself two tablets of stone like the first ones, and I will write on the tablets the words that appeared on the first tablets, which you shattered. 2 Get ready for the morning, as you will go up in the morning to Mount Siʹnai and station yourself before me there on the top of the mountain. 3 But nobody may go up with you, and nobody else should be seen anywhere on the mountain. Not even the flocks or herds should graze in front of that mountain.”4 So Moses carved out two tablets of stone like the first ones and got up early in the morning and went up Mount Siʹnai, just as Jehovah had commanded him, and he took the two tablets of stone in his hand. 5 Then Jehovah came down in the cloud and stationed himself with him there and declared the name of Jehovah. 6 Jehovah was passing before him and declaring: “Jehovah, Jehovah, a God merciful and compassionate, slow to anger and abundant in loyal love and truth, 7 showing loyal love to thousands, pardoning error and transgression and sin, but he will by no means leave the guilty unpunished, bringing punishment for the error of fathers upon sons and upon grandsons, upon the third generation and upon the fourth generation.”8 Moses hurried to bow low to the earth and prostrate himself. 9 Then he said: “If, now, I have found favor in your eyes, O Jehovah, then please, Jehovah, go along with us in our midst, although we are an obstinate people, and forgive our error and our sin, and take us as your own possession.” 10 In turn he said: “Here I am making a covenant: Before all your people, I will do wonderful things that have never been done in all the earth or among all the nations, and all the people among whom you live will see the work of Jehovah, for it is an awe-inspiring thing that I am doing with you.11 “Pay attention to what I am commanding you today. Here I am driving out from before you the Amʹor·ites, the Caʹnaan·ites, the Hitʹtites, the Perʹiz·zites, the Hiʹvites, and the Jebʹu·sites. 12 Be careful that you do not make a covenant with the inhabitants of the land to which you are going, or it may prove to be a snare among you. 13 But you are to pull down their altars, you are to shatter their sacred pillars, and their sacred poles you are to cut down. 14 You must not bow down to another god, for Jehovah is known for requiring exclusive devotion. Yes, he is a God who requires exclusive devotion. 15 Be careful not to make a covenant with the inhabitants of the land, because when they prostitute themselves to their gods and sacrifice to their gods, someone will invite you and you will eat from his sacrifice. 16 Then you will surely take some of their daughters for your sons, and their daughters will prostitute themselves to their gods and cause your sons to prostitute themselves to their gods.17 “You must not make gods of cast metal.18 “You are to observe the Festival of Unleavened Bread. You will eat unleavened bread, just as I have commanded you; do this for seven days at the appointed time in the month of Aʹbib, because it was in the month of Aʹbib that you came out of Egypt.19 “Every firstborn male is mine, including all your livestock, whether the first male bull or sheep. 20 The firstling of a donkey you are to redeem with a sheep. But if you do not redeem it, then you must break its neck. You are to redeem every firstborn of your sons. No one may appear before me empty-handed.21 “Six days you are to work, but on the seventh day you will rest. Even during plowing time and in harvest, you will rest.22 “And you will celebrate your Festival of Weeks with the first ripe fruits of the wheat harvest, and the Festival of Ingathering at the turn of the year.23 “Three times a year, all your men are to appear before the true Lord, Jehovah, the God of Israel. 24 For I will drive the nations away from before you, and I will enlarge your territory, and nobody will desire your land while you are going up to see the face of Jehovah your God three times a year.25 “You must not offer the blood of my sacrifice along with anything leavened. The sacrifice of the festival of the Passover should not be kept overnight until the morning.26 “The best of the first ripe fruits of your soil you are to bring to the house of Jehovah your God.“You must not boil a young goat in its mother’s milk.”27 Jehovah went on to say to Moses: “You are to write down these words, because in accordance with these words, I am making a covenant with you and with Israel.” 28 And he remained there with Jehovah 40 days and 40 nights. He ate no bread and drank no water. And He wrote on the tablets the words of the covenant, the Ten Commandments.29 Moses then came down from Mount Siʹnai, and the two tablets of the Testimony were in his hand. When he came down from the mountain, Moses did not know that the skin of his face was emitting rays because he had been speaking with God. 30 When Aaron and all the Israelites saw Moses, they noticed that the skin of his face emitted rays and they were afraid to go near him.31 But Moses called to them, so Aaron and all the chieftains of the assembly came to him, and Moses spoke with them. 32 After that all the Israelites came near to him, and he gave them all the commands that Jehovah had given him on Mount Siʹnai. 33 When Moses would finish speaking with them, he would put a veil over his face. 34 But when Moses would go in before Jehovah to speak with him, he would take off the veil until he went out. Then he went out and revealed to the Israelites the commands he had received. 35 And the Israelites saw that the skin of Moses’ face emitted rays; then Moses put the veil back over his face until he went in to speak with God.
35 Moses later gathered the entire assembly of the Israelites together and said to them: “These are the things that Jehovah has commanded to be done: 2 Work may be done for six days, but the seventh day will become something holy to you, a sabbath of complete rest to Jehovah. Anybody doing work on it will be put to death. 3 You must not light a fire in any of your dwelling places on the Sabbath day.”4 Moses then said to the entire assembly of the Israelites: “This is what Jehovah has commanded, 5 ‘Take up a contribution for Jehovah from among yourselves. Let everyone with a willing heart bring a contribution for Jehovah: gold, silver, copper, 6 blue thread, purple wool, scarlet material, fine linen, goat hair, 7 ram skins dyed red, sealskins, acacia wood, 8 oil for the lamps, balsam for the anointing oil and for the perfumed incense, 9 onyx stones, and other stones for setting in the ephʹod and the breastpiece.10 “‘Let all who are skilled among you come and make everything that Jehovah has commanded, 11 namely, the tabernacle with its tent and its covering, its clasps and its panel frames, its bars, its pillars, and its socket pedestals; 12 the Ark and its poles, the cover, and the curtain for the screen; 13 the table and its poles and all its utensils and the showbread; 14 the lampstand for light and its utensils and its lamps and the oil for lighting; 15 the altar of incense and its poles; the anointing oil and the perfumed incense; the screen for the tabernacle’s entrance; 16 the altar of burnt offering and its copper grating, its poles and all its utensils; the basin and its stand; 17 the hanging curtains of the courtyard, its pillars and its socket pedestals; the screen of the entrance to the courtyard; 18 the tent pins of the tabernacle and the tent pins of the courtyard and their cords; 19 the finely woven garments for ministering in the sanctuary, the holy garments for Aaron the priest, and the garments of his sons for serving as priests.’”20 So all the assembly of the Israelites went out from before Moses. 21 Then everyone whose heart impelled him and everyone whose spirit incited him came and brought their contribution for Jehovah to be used for the tent of meeting, for all its service, and for the holy garments. 22 They kept coming, the men along with the women, each with a willing heart, bringing brooches, earrings, rings, and other jewelry, as well as all sorts of articles of gold. They all presented their offerings of gold to Jehovah. 23 And all who had blue thread, purple wool, scarlet material, fine linen, goat hair, ram skins dyed red, and sealskins brought them. 24 All those contributing silver and copper brought Jehovah’s contribution, and all who had acacia wood for any part of the work brought it.25 All the skilled women spun with their hands, and they brought what they had spun: blue thread, purple wool, scarlet material, and fine linen. 26 And all the skilled women whose hearts impelled them spun the goat hair.27 And the chieftains brought onyx stones and other stones to be set in the ephʹod and the breastpiece, 28 and the balsam and the oil for lighting and for the anointing oil and for the perfumed incense. 29 All the men and women whose hearts incited them brought something for the work that Jehovah, through Moses, had commanded to be done; the Israelites brought it as a voluntary offering to Jehovah.30 Then Moses said to the Israelites: “See, Jehovah has chosen Bezʹal·el the son of Uʹri the son of Hur of the tribe of Judah. 31 He has filled him with the spirit of God, giving him wisdom, understanding, and knowledge of every sort of craftsmanship 32 for making artistic designs, for working with gold, silver, and copper, 33 for cutting and setting stones, and for making all kinds of artistic wood products. 34 And he has put it into his heart to teach, he and O·hoʹli·ab the son of A·hisʹa·mach of the tribe of Dan. 35 He has filled them with skill to do all the work of a craftsman, an embroiderer, and a weaver using blue thread, purple wool, scarlet material, and fine linen, and of a loom worker. These men will do every sort of work and prepare every sort of design.
36 “Bezʹal·el will work along with O·hoʹli·ab and every skilled man to whom Jehovah has given wisdom and understanding so as to know how to do all the work of the holy service just as Jehovah has commanded.”2 Moses then called Bezʹal·el and O·hoʹli·ab and every skilled man into whose heart Jehovah had put wisdom, everyone whose heart impelled him to volunteer to do the work. 3 Then they took from Moses all the contribution that the Israelites had brought for the work of the holy service. However, these continued to bring him voluntary offerings, morning after morning.4 Then after they started the holy work, all the skilled workers were coming, one after another, 5 and they were telling Moses: “The people are bringing much more than what is required for the work that Jehovah has commanded to be done.” 6 So Moses commanded that an announcement be made throughout the camp, saying: “Men and women, do not bring any more goods for the holy contribution.” With that the people were restrained from bringing in anything else. 7 The goods were enough for all the work to be done, and more than enough.8 So all the skilled workers made the tabernacle of ten tent cloths of fine twisted linen, blue thread, purple wool, and scarlet material; he made them with cherubs embroidered on them. 9 Each tent cloth was 28 cubits long and 4 cubits wide. All the tent cloths were the same size. 10 Then he joined five of the tent cloths together, and the other five tent cloths he joined together. 11 After that he made loops of blue thread on the edge of the one tent cloth where it would join. He did the same on the edge of the outermost tent cloth at the corresponding place where it would join. 12 He made 50 loops on the one tent cloth and 50 loops on the other edge of the tent cloth at the place where it would join so that the loops would be opposite one another. 13 Finally, he made 50 gold clasps and joined the tent cloths together with the clasps, so that the tabernacle became one unit.14 Then he made tent cloths of goat hair for the tent over the tabernacle. He made 11 tent cloths. 15 Each tent cloth was 30 cubits long and 4 cubits wide. The 11 tent cloths were the same size. 16 Then he joined five of the tent cloths together, and he joined the other six tent cloths together. 17 Next he made 50 loops along the edge of the outermost tent cloth where it joined, and he made 50 loops along the edge of the other tent cloth that joined with it. 18 And he made 50 copper clasps for joining the tent together to become one unit.19 He made a covering for the tent out of ram skins dyed red and a covering out of sealskins to go over that.20 Then he made out of acacia wood the tabernacle’s panel frames, which stood upright. 21 Each panel frame was ten cubits high and one and a half cubits wide. 22 Each panel frame had two tenons joined to each other. That is how he made all the panel frames of the tabernacle. 23 Thus he made the panel frames for the south side of the tabernacle, 20 panel frames, facing south. 24 Then he made 40 socket pedestals of silver to go under the 20 panel frames, two socket pedestals beneath one panel frame for its two tenons and two socket pedestals under each following panel frame for its two tenons. 25 For the other side of the tabernacle, the northern side, he made 20 panel frames 26 and their 40 socket pedestals of silver, two socket pedestals beneath the one panel frame and two socket pedestals beneath each of the other panel frames.27 For the rear section of the tabernacle to the west, he made six panel frames. 28 He made two panel frames as corner posts of the tabernacle at the two rear corners. 29 The posts were doubled from the bottom to the top, up to the first ring. That is what he did with the two corner posts. 30 So they amounted to eight panel frames along with their 16 socket pedestals of silver, two socket pedestals under each panel frame.31 Then he made bars of acacia wood, five bars for the panel frames of the one side of the tabernacle 32 and five bars for the panel frames of the other side of the tabernacle and five for the panel frames of the tabernacle for the rear section to the west. 33 Then he made the middle bar to extend along the middle of the panel frames from one end to the other. 34 He overlaid the panel frames with gold, and he made their rings of gold as holders for the bars, and he overlaid the bars with gold.35 Then he made a curtain of blue thread, purple wool, scarlet material, and fine twisted linen. He made it with cherubs embroidered on it. 36 Then he made for it four acacia pillars and overlaid them with gold, along with hooks of gold, and cast four socket pedestals of silver for them. 37 Next he made a screen for the entrance of the tent out of blue thread, purple wool, scarlet material, and fine twisted linen woven together, 38 as well as its five pillars and their hooks. He overlaid their tops and their connectors with gold, but their five socket pedestals were of copper.
37 Bezʹal·el then made the Ark of acacia wood. It was two and a half cubits long and a cubit and a half wide and a cubit and a half high. 2 He overlaid it with pure gold inside and outside and made a border of gold around it. 3 After that he cast four rings of gold for it, for above its four feet, with two rings on its one side and two rings on its other side. 4 He next made poles of acacia wood and overlaid them with gold. 5 Then he put the poles through the rings on the sides of the Ark for carrying the Ark.6 He made the cover of pure gold. It was two and a half cubits long and a cubit and a half wide. 7 He then made two cherubs of hammered gold on both ends of the cover. 8 One cherub was on one end, and the other cherub on the other end. He made the cherubs on both ends of the cover. 9 The two cherubs spread out their wings upward, overshadowing the cover with their wings. They were facing each other, and their faces were turned toward the cover.10 He then made the table of acacia wood. It was two cubits long, a cubit wide, and a cubit and a half high. 11 And he overlaid it with pure gold and made a border of gold around it. 12 Next he made a rim the width of a handbreadth to go around it and a border of gold to go around the rim. 13 Further, he cast four rings of gold for it and placed the rings on the four corners where the four legs were attached. 14 The rings were near the rim, as holders for the poles used for carrying the table. 15 Then he made the poles of acacia wood and overlaid them with gold for carrying the table. 16 After that he made out of pure gold the utensils that went on the table—its dishes, its cups, its bowls, and its pitchers from which drink offerings would be poured.17 Then he made the lampstand of pure gold. He made the lampstand of hammered work. Its base, its stem, its cups, its knobs, and its blossoms were one piece. 18 Six branches were extending out from its stem, three branches of the lampstand from its one side and three branches from its other side. 19 Three cups shaped like almond flowers were on the one set of branches, with knobs and blossoms alternating, and three cups shaped like almond flowers were on the other set of branches, with knobs and blossoms alternating. This was done for the six branches extending out from the stem of the lampstand. 20 And on the stem of the lampstand were four cups shaped like almond flowers, with knobs and blossoms alternating. 21 There was a knob under the first two branches that extended out of the stem and a knob under the next two branches and a knob under the next two branches, for the six branches extending out from the stem of the lampstand. 22 The knobs and the branches and the whole lampstand were made to be one piece of pure, hammered gold. 23 Then he made its seven lamps and its snuffers and its fire holders out of pure gold. 24 He made it, along with all its utensils, from a talent of pure gold.25 He now made the altar of incense out of acacia wood. It was square, a cubit long, a cubit wide, and two cubits high. Its horns were one piece with it. 26 He overlaid it with pure gold, its top surface and its sides all around and its horns, and he made a border of gold around it. 27 He made two rings of gold for it below its border on two opposite sides to hold the poles used for carrying it. 28 After that he made the poles of acacia wood and overlaid them with gold. 29 He also made the holy anointing oil and the pure, perfumed incense, skillfully blended.
38 He made the altar of burnt offering out of acacia wood. It was square, five cubits long, five cubits wide, and three cubits high. 2 Then he made its horns on its four corners. Its horns were one piece with it. Next he overlaid it with copper. 3 After that he made all the utensils of the altar, the cans, the shovels, the bowls, the forks, and the fire holders. All its utensils he made of copper. 4 He also made a grating for the altar, a network of copper, under its rim, down toward its center. 5 He cast four rings on the four corners near the grating of copper, as holders for the poles. 6 After that he made the poles of acacia wood and overlaid them with copper. 7 He inserted the poles into the rings on the sides of the altar for carrying it. He made the altar in the form of a hollow chest of planks.8 Then he made the basin of copper and its copper stand; he used the mirrors of the women who were organized to serve at the entrance of the tent of meeting.9 Then he made the courtyard. For the south side of the courtyard, facing south, he made the hanging curtains of fine twisted linen, for 100 cubits. 10 There were 20 pillars and 20 socket pedestals of copper, and the hooks of the pillars and their connectors were of silver. 11 Also, for the north side, there were 100 cubits of hanging curtains. Their 20 pillars and their 20 socket pedestals were of copper. The hooks of the pillars and their connectors were of silver. 12 But for the west side, the hanging curtains were for 50 cubits. There were ten pillars and ten socket pedestals, and the hooks of the pillars and their connectors were of silver. 13 The width of the east side, toward the sunrising, was 50 cubits. 14 There were 15 cubits of hanging curtains on the one wing, with three pillars and three socket pedestals. 15 And for the other wing on the other side of the entrance of the courtyard, there were hanging curtains for 15 cubits, with three pillars and three socket pedestals. 16 All the hanging curtains around the courtyard were of fine twisted linen. 17 The socket pedestals for the pillars were of copper, the hooks of the pillars and their connectors were of silver, the tops were overlaid with silver, and there were silver fasteners for all the pillars of the courtyard.18 The screen of the entrance of the courtyard was woven of blue thread, purple wool, scarlet material, and fine twisted linen. It was 20 cubits long and 5 cubits high, the same height as the hanging curtains of the courtyard. 19 Their four pillars and their four socket pedestals were made of copper. Their hooks were of silver, and their tops and connectors were overlaid with silver. 20 All the tent pins for the tabernacle and around the courtyard were of copper.21 The following is the inventory of the tabernacle, the tabernacle of the Testimony, which was inventoried at the command of Moses, as the responsibility of the Levites under the direction of Ithʹa·mar the son of Aaron the priest. 22 Bezʹal·el the son of Uʹri the son of Hur of the tribe of Judah did all that Jehovah had commanded Moses. 23 With him was O·hoʹli·ab the son of A·hisʹa·mach of the tribe of Dan, a craftsman and an embroiderer and a weaver of the blue thread, the purple wool, the scarlet material, and the fine linen.24 All the gold that was used for all the work of the holy place equaled the amount of the gold of the wave offering, 29 talents and 730 shekels by the standard shekel of the holy place. 25 And the silver of the ones registered of the assembly was 100 talents and 1,775 shekels by the standard shekel of the holy place. 26 The half shekel for each individual was half a shekel by the standard shekel of the holy place for every man who was among those registered from 20 years of age and up, amounting to 603,550.27 The casting of the socket pedestals of the holy place and the socket pedestals of the curtain amounted to 100 talents; 100 socket pedestals equaled 100 talents, one talent for each socket pedestal. 28 From the 1,775 shekels, he made hooks for the pillars and overlaid their tops and joined them together.29 The copper of the offering was 70 talents and 2,400 shekels. 30 With this he made the socket pedestals of the entrance of the tent of meeting, the copper altar and its copper grating, all the utensils of the altar, 31 the socket pedestals around the courtyard, the socket pedestals of the entrance of the courtyard, and all the tent pins of the tabernacle and all the tent pins around the courtyard.
39 From the blue thread, the purple wool, and the scarlet material, they made finely woven garments for ministering in the holy place. They made the holy garments that were for Aaron, just as Jehovah had commanded Moses.2 He made the ephʹod of gold, blue thread, purple wool, scarlet material, and fine twisted linen. 3 They hammered plates of gold into thin sheets, and he cut it into threads to work in with the blue thread, the purple wool, the scarlet material, and the fine linen, and it was embroidered. 4 They made shoulder pieces for it that were attached, and it was joined to them at its two edges. 5 And the woven belt, which was attached to the ephʹod for tying it securely in position, was made of the same material, of gold, blue thread, purple wool, scarlet material, and fine twisted linen, just as Jehovah had commanded Moses.6 Then they mounted the onyx stones in gold settings, and they engraved them with the names of the sons of Israel, as they would engrave a seal. 7 He placed them on the shoulder pieces of the ephʹod as memorial stones for the sons of Israel, just as Jehovah had commanded Moses. 8 Then he made the breastpiece with the workmanship of an embroiderer, like the workmanship of the ephʹod, out of gold, blue thread, purple wool, scarlet material, and fine twisted linen. 9 It was square when doubled. They made the breastpiece, which, when doubled, was as long and as wide as the span of the hand. 10 They set four rows of stones in it. The first row was ruby, topaz, and emerald. 11 The second row was turquoise, sapphire, and jasper. 12 The third row was leshʹem stone, agate, and amethyst. 13 And the fourth row was chrysʹo·lite, onyx, and jade. They were mounted in settings of gold. 14 The stones corresponded to the names of the 12 sons of Israel, and the names were engraved like a seal, each name representing one of the 12 tribes.15 Then they made wreathed chains on the breastpiece, like cords of pure gold. 16 And they made two settings of gold and two rings of gold and attached the two rings to the two corners of the breastpiece. 17 After that they put the two cords of gold through the two rings at the corners of the breastpiece. 18 Then they put the two ends of the two cords through the two settings and attached them to the shoulder pieces on the front of the ephʹod. 19 Next they made two rings of gold and set them at the two ends on the inside edge of the breastpiece, facing the ephʹod. 20 Then they made two more rings of gold and put them on the front of the ephʹod, below the two shoulder pieces, close to where it is joined, above the woven belt of the ephʹod. 21 Finally, they tied the breastpiece with a blue cord from its rings to the rings of the ephʹod, in order to keep the breastpiece in its place on the ephʹod, above the woven belt, just as Jehovah had commanded Moses.22 Then he made the sleeveless coat of the ephʹod, woven by a loom worker, all of blue thread. 23 The opening of the sleeveless coat was in the middle of it, like the opening of a coat of mail. Its opening had a border around it, so that it would not be torn. 24 Next they made on the hem of the sleeveless coat pomegranates of blue thread, purple wool, and scarlet material, twisted together. 25 And they made bells of pure gold and put the bells in between the pomegranates all around the hem of the sleeveless coat, in between the pomegranates; 26 they alternated a bell and a pomegranate, a bell and a pomegranate, all around the hem of the sleeveless coat, which was used for ministering, just as Jehovah had commanded Moses.27 And they made the robes of fine linen, woven by a loom worker, for Aaron and his sons, 28 and the turban of fine linen, the ornamental headgear of fine linen, the linen shorts of fine twisted linen, 29 and the sash of fine twisted linen, blue thread, purple wool, and scarlet material woven together, just as Jehovah had commanded Moses.30 Finally, they made the shining plate, the holy sign of dedication, out of pure gold and inscribed on it an inscription as one would engrave a seal: “Holiness belongs to Jehovah.” 31 They attached to it a cord made from blue thread in order to put it on the turban, just as Jehovah had commanded Moses.32 So all the work for the tabernacle, the tent of meeting, was completed, and the Israelites did everything that Jehovah had commanded Moses. They did just so.33 Then they brought the tabernacle to Moses, the tent and all its utensils: its clasps, its panel frames, its bars and its pillars and its socket pedestals; 34 its covering of ram skins dyed red, its covering of sealskins, the curtain for the screen; 35 the ark of the Testimony and its poles and the cover; 36 the table, all its utensils and the showbread; 37 the lampstand of pure gold, its lamps, the row of lamps, and all its utensils and the oil for lighting; 38 the altar of gold, the anointing oil, the perfumed incense, the screen for the entrance of the tent; 39 the altar of copper and its grating of copper, its poles, all its utensils, the basin and its stand; 40 the hanging curtains of the courtyard, its pillars and its socket pedestals, the screen for the entrance of the courtyard, its tent cords and its tent pins and all the utensils for the service of the tabernacle, for the tent of meeting; 41 the finely woven garments for ministering in the sanctuary, the holy garments for Aaron the priest, and the garments of his sons for serving as priests.42 According to all that Jehovah had commanded Moses, that was how the Israelites did all the work. 43 When Moses inspected all their work, he saw that they had done it just as Jehovah had commanded; and Moses blessed them.
4 However, Moses answered: “But suppose they do not believe me and do not listen to my voice, for they will say, ‘Jehovah did not appear to you.’” 2 Then Jehovah said to him: “What is that in your hand?” He answered: “A rod.” 3 He said: “Throw it on the ground.” So he threw it on the ground, and it became a serpent; and Moses fled from it. 4 Jehovah now said to Moses: “Reach out your hand and seize it by the tail.” So he reached out and seized it, and it became a rod in his hand. 5 God then said: “This is so that they may believe that Jehovah the God of their forefathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, has appeared to you.”6 Jehovah said to him once more: “Put your hand, please, into the upper fold of your garment.” So he put his hand into the fold of his garment. When he drew it out, why, his hand was stricken with leprosy like snow! 7 Then he said: “Return your hand into the upper fold of your garment.” So he returned his hand into his garment. When he drew it out of the garment, it was restored like the rest of his flesh! 8 He said: “If they will not believe you or pay attention to the first sign, then they will certainly heed the next sign. 9 Still, even if they will not believe these two signs and refuse to listen to your voice, you will take some water from the Nile River and pour it out on the dry land, and the water that you take from the Nile will become blood on the dry land.”10 Moses now said to Jehovah: “Pardon me, Jehovah, but I have never been a fluent speaker, neither in the past nor since you have spoken to your servant, for I am slow of speech and slow of tongue.” 11 Jehovah said to him: “Who made a mouth for man, or who makes them speechless, deaf, clear-sighted, or blind? Is it not I, Jehovah? 12 So go now, and I will be with you as you speak, and I will teach you what you should say.” 13 But he said: “Pardon me, Jehovah, please send anyone whom you want to send.” 14 Then Jehovah’s anger blazed against Moses, and he said: “What about your brother Aaron the Levite? I know that he can speak very well. And he is now on his way here to meet you. When he sees you, his heart will rejoice. 15 So you must speak to him and put the words in his mouth, and I will be with you and him as you speak, and I will teach you men what to do. 16 He will speak for you to the people, and he will be your spokesman, and you will serve as God to him. 17 And you will take this rod in your hand and perform the signs with it.”18 So Moses went back to Jethʹro his father-in-law and said to him: “I want to go, please, and return to my brothers who are in Egypt to see whether they are still alive.” Jethʹro said to Moses: “Go in peace.” 19 After that Jehovah said to Moses in Midʹi·an: “Go, return to Egypt, because all the men who were seeking to kill you are dead.”20 Then Moses took his wife and his sons and lifted them onto a donkey, and he started back to the land of Egypt. Moreover, Moses took the rod of the true God in his hand. 21 Then Jehovah said to Moses: “After you have returned to Egypt, see that you perform before Pharʹaoh all the miracles that I have empowered you to do. But I will allow his heart to become obstinate, and he will not send the people away. 22 You must say to Pharʹaoh, ‘This is what Jehovah says: “Israel is my son, my firstborn. 23 I say to you, Send my son away so that he may serve me. But if you refuse to send him away, I am going to kill your son, your firstborn.”’”24 Now on the road at the lodging place, Jehovah met him and was seeking to put him to death. 25 Finally Zip·poʹrah took a flint and circumcised her son and caused his foreskin to touch his feet and said: “It is because you are a bridegroom of blood to me.” 26 So He let him go. At that time she said, “a bridegroom of blood,” because of the circumcision.27 Then Jehovah said to Aaron: “Go into the wilderness to meet Moses.” So he went and met him at the mountain of the true God and greeted him with a kiss. 28 And Moses told Aaron all the words of Jehovah, who had sent him, and all the signs that He had commanded him to do. 29 After that Moses and Aaron went and gathered all the elders of the Israelites. 30 Aaron told them all the words that Jehovah had spoken to Moses, and he performed the signs before the eyes of the people. 31 At this the people believed. When they heard that Jehovah had turned his attention to the Israelites and that he had seen their affliction, they bowed down and prostrated themselves.
40 Then Jehovah said to Moses: 2 “On the first day of the first month, you are to set up the tabernacle, the tent of meeting. 3 Place the ark of the Testimony in it, and screen off the Ark with the curtain. 4 You are to bring the table in and arrange the things that belong on it and bring in the lampstand and light its lamps. 5 Then put the golden altar for incense before the ark of the Testimony and put the screen for the entrance of the tabernacle in place.6 “You are to put the altar of burnt offering before the entrance of the tabernacle, the tent of meeting, 7 and place the basin between the tent of meeting and the altar and put water in it. 8 Then set up the courtyard around it and put up the screen for the entrance of the courtyard. 9 Next you are to take the anointing oil and anoint the tabernacle and all that is in it, and sanctify it and all its utensils, so that it will become something holy. 10 You are to anoint the altar of burnt offering and all its utensils and sanctify the altar, so that it will become a most holy altar. 11 And anoint the basin and its stand and sanctify it.12 “Then bring Aaron and his sons near to the entrance of the tent of meeting, and wash them with water. 13 And you are to clothe Aaron with the holy garments and anoint him and sanctify him, and he will serve as priest to me. 14 After that bring his sons near, and clothe them with robes. 15 You are to anoint them just as you anointed their father, so that they will serve as priests to me, and their anointing will serve continually for them as a lasting priesthood during their generations.”16 Moses did according to all that Jehovah had commanded him. He did just so.17 In the first month, in the second year, on the first day of the month, the tabernacle was set up. 18 When Moses set up the tabernacle, he put its socket pedestals down, set up the panel frames, put its bars in, and set up its pillars. 19 He spread out the tent over the tabernacle and placed the covering of the tent over it, just as Jehovah had commanded Moses.20 After that he took the Testimony and put it into the Ark and placed the poles on the Ark and put the cover on the Ark. 21 He brought the Ark into the tabernacle and put the curtain of the screen in place and screened off the ark of the Testimony, just as Jehovah had commanded Moses.22 Next he put the table in the tent of meeting on the north side of the tabernacle outside the curtain, 23 and he arranged the row of bread on it before Jehovah, just as Jehovah had commanded Moses.24 He placed the lampstand in the tent of meeting in front of the table, on the south side of the tabernacle. 25 He lit the lamps before Jehovah, just as Jehovah had commanded Moses.26 He next placed the golden altar in the tent of meeting before the curtain, 27 in order to make perfumed incense smoke on it, just as Jehovah had commanded Moses.28 Then he put the screen for the entrance of the tabernacle in place.29 He placed the altar of burnt offering at the entrance of the tabernacle, the tent of meeting, so that he might offer up the burnt offering and the grain offering on it, just as Jehovah had commanded Moses.30 He then placed the basin between the tent of meeting and the altar and put water in it for washing. 31 Moses and Aaron and his sons washed their hands and their feet at it. 32 Whenever they went into the tent of meeting or approached the altar, they would wash, just as Jehovah had commanded Moses.33 Finally he set up the courtyard around the tabernacle and the altar and put up the screen for the entrance of the courtyard.So Moses finished the work. 34 And the cloud began to cover the tent of meeting, and Jehovah’s glory filled the tabernacle. 35 Moses was not able to go into the tent of meeting because the cloud remained over it, and Jehovah’s glory filled the tabernacle.36 And when the cloud lifted from the tabernacle, the Israelites would break camp during all stages of their journey. 37 However, if the cloud did not lift up, then they would not break camp until the day it lifted. 38 For Jehovah’s cloud was over the tabernacle by day, and a fire remained over it by night in the sight of all the house of Israel during all stages of their journey.
5 Afterward, Moses and Aaron went in and said to Pharʹaoh: “This is what Jehovah the God of Israel says, ‘Send my people away so that they may celebrate a festival to me in the wilderness.’” 2 But Pharʹaoh said: “Who is Jehovah, that I should obey his voice to send Israel away? I do not know Jehovah at all, and what is more, I will not send Israel away.” 3 But they said: “The God of the Hebrews has communicated with us. Please, we want to make a three-day journey into the wilderness and sacrifice to Jehovah our God; otherwise, he will strike us with disease or with the sword.” 4 The king of Egypt replied to them: “Why is it, Moses and Aaron, that you are taking the people away from their work? Return to your labor!” 5 And Pharʹaoh continued: “Look at how many people of the land there are, and you would have them rest from their labor.”6 That same day, Pharʹaoh commanded the taskmasters and their foremen: 7 “You must no longer give straw to the people to make bricks. Let them go and gather straw for themselves. 8 But you must still impose on them the same quota of bricks as they made in the past. Do not reduce it for them, for they are relaxing. That is why they are crying out, ‘We want to go, we want to sacrifice to our God!’ 9 Make them work harder, and keep them busy so that they will not pay attention to lies.”10 So the taskmasters and their foremen went out and said to the people: “Here is what Pharʹaoh has said, ‘I am giving you no more straw. 11 Go and get your own straw for yourselves wherever you can find it, but your work will not be reduced at all.’” 12 Then the people scattered throughout all the land of Egypt to gather stubble for straw. 13 And the taskmasters kept urging them: “You must each finish your work every day, just as when straw was provided.” 14 Also the foremen of the Israelites, whom Pharʹaoh’s taskmasters had appointed over them, were beaten. They asked them: “Why did you not reach the quota of bricks that you used to make? It happened both yesterday and today.”15 So the foremen of the Israelites went in and complained to Pharʹaoh: “Why are you treating your servants this way? 16 No straw is given to your servants, yet they are saying to us, ‘Make bricks!’ Your servants are beaten, but your own people are at fault.” 17 But he said: “You are relaxing, you are relaxing! That is why you are saying, ‘We want to go, we want to sacrifice to Jehovah.’ 18 So now go, get back to work! No straw will be given to you, but you must still produce your quota of bricks.”19 Then the foremen of the Israelites saw that they were in serious trouble because of the order: “You must not reduce your daily quota of bricks at all.” 20 After that they met up with Moses and Aaron, who were standing there to meet them as they came out from Pharʹaoh. 21 At once they said to them: “May Jehovah look upon you and judge, since you have made Pharʹaoh and his servants despise us and you have put a sword in their hand to kill us.” 22 Then Moses turned to Jehovah and said: “Jehovah, why have you afflicted this people? Why have you sent me? 23 From the time that I went in before Pharʹaoh to speak in your name, he has dealt worse with this people, and you have certainly not rescued your people.”
6 So Jehovah said to Moses: “Now you will see what I will do to Pharʹaoh. A mighty hand will force him to send them away, and a mighty hand will force him to drive them out of his land.”2 Then God said to Moses: “I am Jehovah. 3 And I used to appear to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob as God Almighty, but with regard to my name Jehovah I did not make myself known to them. 4 I also established my covenant with them to give them the land of Caʹnaan, the land in which they lived as foreigners. 5 Now I myself have heard the groaning of the people of Israel, whom the Egyptians are enslaving, and I remember my covenant.6 “Therefore, say to the Israelites: ‘I am Jehovah, and I will bring you out from under the burdens of the Egyptians and rescue you from their slavery, and I will reclaim you with an outstretched arm and with great judgments. 7 And I will take you in as my people, and I will be your God, and you will certainly know that I am Jehovah your God who is bringing you out from under the burdens of Egypt. 8 And I will bring you into the land that I swore with an oath to give to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; and I will give it to you as something to possess. I am Jehovah.’”9 Moses later gave this message to the Israelites, but they did not listen to Moses because of their discouragement and because of the harsh slavery.10 Then Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying: 11 “Go in and tell Pharʹaoh, Egypt’s king, that he should send the Israelites away out of his land.” 12 However, Moses replied to Jehovah: “Look! The Israelites have not listened to me; how will Pharʹaoh ever listen to me, as I speak with difficulty?” 13 But Jehovah again told Moses and Aaron what commands to give to the Israelites and to Pharʹaoh, Egypt’s king, in order to bring the Israelites out of the land of Egypt.14 These are the heads of the house of their fathers: The sons of Reuʹben, Israel’s firstborn, were Haʹnoch, Palʹlu, Hezʹron, and Carʹmi. These are the families of Reuʹben.15 The sons of Simʹe·on were Jem·uʹel, Jaʹmin, Oʹhad, Jaʹchin, Zoʹhar, and Shaʹul, the son of a Caʹnaan·ite woman. These are the families of Simʹe·on.16 These are the names of the sons of Leʹvi, according to their family descents: Gerʹshon, Koʹhath, and Me·rarʹi. The length of Leʹvi’s life was 137 years.17 The sons of Gerʹshon were Libʹni and Shimʹe·i, according to their families.18 The sons of Koʹhath were Amʹram, Izʹhar, Hebʹron, and Uzʹzi·el. The length of Koʹhath’s life was 133 years.19 The sons of Me·rarʹi were Mahʹli and Muʹshi.These were the families of the Levites, according to their family descents.20 Now Amʹram took Jochʹe·bed, his father’s sister, as his wife. She bore him Aaron and Moses. The length of Amʹram’s life was 137 years.21 The sons of Izʹhar were Korʹah, Neʹpheg, and Zichʹri.22 The sons of Uzʹzi·el were Mishʹa·el, El·zaʹphan, and Sithʹri.23 Now Aaron took E·liʹshe·ba, Am·minʹa·dab’s daughter, the sister of Nahʹshon, as his wife. She bore him Naʹdab, A·biʹhu, El·e·aʹzar, and Ithʹa·mar.24 The sons of Korʹah were Asʹsir, El·kaʹnah, and A·biʹa·saph. These were the families of the Korʹah·ites.25 El·e·aʹzar, Aaron’s son, took one of the daughters of Puʹti·el as his wife. She bore him Phinʹe·has.These are the heads of the paternal houses of the Levites, according to their families.26 This is the Aaron and Moses to whom Jehovah said: “Bring the people of Israel out of the land of Egypt, company by company.” 27 It was they who spoke to Pharʹaoh, Egypt’s king, to bring the people of Israel out of Egypt. It was this Moses and Aaron.28 On that day when Jehovah spoke to Moses in the land of Egypt, 29 Jehovah told Moses: “I am Jehovah. Speak to Pharʹaoh, king of Egypt, everything I am speaking to you.” 30 Then Moses said before Jehovah: “Look! I speak with difficulty, so how will Pharʹaoh ever listen to me?”
7 Jehovah then said to Moses: “See, I have made you like God to Pharʹaoh, and Aaron your own brother will become your prophet. 2 You are to repeat everything that I will command you, and Aaron your brother will speak to Pharʹaoh, and he will send the Israelites away from his land. 3 As for me, I will allow Pharʹaoh’s heart to become obstinate, and I will multiply my signs and my miracles in the land of Egypt. 4 But Pharʹaoh will not listen to you, and I will lay my hand upon Egypt and bring my multitudes, my people, the Israelites, out of the land of Egypt with great judgments. 5 And the Egyptians will certainly know that I am Jehovah when I stretch out my hand against Egypt and bring the Israelites out from among them.” 6 Moses and Aaron did what Jehovah had commanded them; they did just so. 7 Moses was 80 years old and Aaron was 83 years old when they spoke to Pharʹaoh.8 Jehovah now said to Moses and Aaron: 9 “If Pharʹaoh says to you, ‘Perform a miracle,’ then tell Aaron, ‘Take your rod and throw it down before Pharʹaoh.’ It will become a big snake.” 10 So Moses and Aaron went in to Pharʹaoh and did exactly as Jehovah had commanded. Aaron threw his rod down before Pharʹaoh and his servants, and it became a big snake. 11 However, Pharʹaoh summoned the wise men and the sorcerers, and the magic-practicing priests of Egypt also did the same thing with their magic. 12 Each one threw down his rod, and they became big snakes; but Aaron’s rod swallowed up their rods. 13 Still, Pharʹaoh’s heart became obstinate, and he did not listen to them, just as Jehovah had said.14 Then Jehovah said to Moses: “Pharʹaoh’s heart is unresponsive. He has refused to send the people away. 15 Go to Pharʹaoh in the morning. Look! He is going out to the water! And you should station yourself to meet him by the edge of the Nile River; and take with you in your hand the rod that turned into a serpent. 16 And you must say to him, ‘Jehovah the God of the Hebrews has sent me to you, and he says: “Send my people away so that they may serve me in the wilderness,” but you have not obeyed until now. 17 This is what Jehovah says: “By this you will know that I am Jehovah. Here I am striking the water that is in the Nile River with the rod that is in my hand, and it will turn into blood. 18 And the fish that are in the Nile will die, and the Nile will stink, and the Egyptians will find it impossible to drink water from the Nile.”’”19 Then Jehovah said to Moses: “Say to Aaron, ‘Take your rod and stretch out your hand over the waters of Egypt, over its rivers, over its canals, over its marshes, and over all its reservoirs, that they may become blood.’ There will be blood in all the land of Egypt, even in the wooden and stone containers.” 20 Immediately Moses and Aaron did just as Jehovah had commanded. He lifted up the rod and struck the water that was in the Nile River before the eyes of Pharʹaoh and his servants, and all the water that was in the river was turned into blood. 21 And the fish that were in the river died, and the river began to stink, and the Egyptians were unable to drink water from the Nile, and there was blood throughout the land of Egypt.22 Nevertheless, the magic-practicing priests of Egypt did the same thing with their secret arts, so that Pharʹaoh’s heart continued to be obstinate, and he did not listen to them, just as Jehovah had said. 23 Then Pharʹaoh returned to his house, and he did not take this to heart either. 24 So all the Egyptians were digging all around the Nile for water to drink, because they could not drink any water of the Nile. 25 And seven full days passed after Jehovah struck the Nile.
8 Then Jehovah said to Moses: “Go in to Pharʹaoh and say to him, ‘This is what Jehovah says: “Send my people away so that they may serve me. 2 If you keep refusing to send them away, I will plague all your territory with frogs. 3 And the Nile River will swarm with frogs, and they will come up and enter into your house, into your bedroom, on your bed, into the houses of your servants and on your people, into your ovens, and into your kneading troughs. 4 On you, on your people, and on all your servants, the frogs will come up.”’”5 Jehovah later said to Moses: “Say to Aaron, ‘Stretch out your hand with your rod over the rivers, the Nile canals, and the marshes, and make the frogs come up over the land of Egypt.’” 6 So Aaron stretched out his hand over the waters of Egypt, and the frogs began to come up and to cover the land of Egypt. 7 However, the magic-practicing priests did the same thing by their secret arts, and they too made the frogs come up over the land of Egypt. 8 Pharʹaoh then called Moses and Aaron and said: “Plead with Jehovah to remove the frogs from me and my people, as I want to send the people away so that they may sacrifice to Jehovah.” 9 Then Moses said to Pharʹaoh: “I leave to you the honor of telling me when I should plead to have the frogs removed from you, your servants, your people, and your houses. Only in the Nile River will they be left.” 10 To this he said: “Tomorrow.” So he said: “It will be according to your word so that you may know that there is no one else like Jehovah our God. 11 The frogs will depart from you, your houses, your servants, and your people. They will be left only in the Nile.”12 So Moses and Aaron went out from Pharʹaoh, and Moses pleaded with Jehovah about the frogs that He had brought upon Pharʹaoh. 13 Then Jehovah did as Moses asked, and the frogs began to die in the houses, the courtyards, and the fields. 14 They were piling them up in countless heaps, and the land began to stink. 15 When Pharʹaoh saw that there was relief, he hardened his heart and he refused to listen to them, just as Jehovah had said.16 Jehovah now said to Moses: “Say to Aaron, ‘Stretch out your rod and strike the dust of the earth, and it must become gnats in all the land of Egypt.’” 17 And they did this. Aaron stretched out his hand with his rod and struck the dust of the earth, and the gnats came on man and beast. All the dust of the earth became gnats in all the land of Egypt. 18 The magic-practicing priests tried to do the same and produce gnats by their secret arts, but they could not. And the gnats came on man and beast. 19 So the magic-practicing priests said to Pharʹaoh: “It is the finger of God!” But Pharʹaoh’s heart continued to be obstinate, and he did not listen to them, just as Jehovah had said.20 Then Jehovah said to Moses: “Get up early in the morning and station yourself in front of Pharʹaoh. Look! He is coming out to the water! And you must say to him, ‘This is what Jehovah has said: “Send my people away so that they may serve me. 21 But if you do not send my people away, I will send on you, your servants, and your people and into your houses the gadfly; and the houses of Egypt will be full of gadflies, and they will even cover the ground they stand on. 22 On that day I will certainly set apart the land of Goʹshen, where my people are dwelling. No gadflies will exist there, and by this you will know that I, Jehovah, am here in the land. 23 And I will make a distinction between my people and your people. Tomorrow this sign will take place.”’”24 And Jehovah did so, and heavy swarms of gadflies began to invade the house of Pharʹaoh and the houses of his servants and all the land of Egypt. The land was ruined by the gadflies. 25 Finally, Pharʹaoh called Moses and Aaron and said: “Go, sacrifice to your God in the land.” 26 But Moses said: “It is not proper to do so, because what we would sacrifice to Jehovah our God would be detestable to the Egyptians. If we would make a sacrifice that was detestable to the Egyptians right before their eyes, would they not stone us? 27 We will make a three-day journey into the wilderness, and there we will sacrifice to Jehovah our God, just as he has said to us.”28 Pharʹaoh now said: “I will send you away to sacrifice to Jehovah your God in the wilderness. Only, you must not go so far away. Plead in my behalf.” 29 Then Moses said: “Now I am going away from you, and I will plead with Jehovah, and the gadflies will depart from Pharʹaoh, his servants, and his people tomorrow. But Pharʹaoh must stop trifling with us by refusing to send the people away to sacrifice to Jehovah.” 30 Moses then went out from Pharʹaoh and pleaded with Jehovah. 31 So Jehovah did according to Moses’ word, and the gadflies departed from Pharʹaoh, his servants, and his people. Not one was left. 32 However, Pharʹaoh again hardened his heart and did not send the people away.
9 So Jehovah said to Moses: “Go in to Pharʹaoh and say to him, ‘This is what Jehovah the God of the Hebrews has said: “Send my people away so that they may serve me. 2 But if you refuse to send them away and you keep holding them, 3 look! Jehovah’s hand will come against your livestock in the field. On the horses, the donkeys, the camels, the herd, and the flock, there will be a devastating plague. 4 And Jehovah will certainly make a distinction between the livestock of Israel and the livestock of Egypt, and nothing that belongs to the Israelites will die.”’” 5 Moreover, Jehovah set an appointed time, saying: “Tomorrow Jehovah will do this in the land.”6 And Jehovah did this on the very next day, and all sorts of livestock of Egypt began to die, but not one of Israel’s livestock died. 7 When Pharʹaoh inquired, look! not so much as one of Israel’s livestock had died. Nevertheless, Pharʹaoh’s heart continued to be unresponsive, and he did not send the people away.8 Jehovah then said to Moses and Aaron: “Fill both of your hands with soot from a kiln, and Moses must throw it into the air in front of Pharʹaoh. 9 And it will become a fine dust on all the land of Egypt, and it will become festering boils on man and beast in all the land of Egypt.”10 So they took soot from a kiln and stood before Pharʹaoh, and Moses tossed it into the air, and it became festering boils breaking out on man and beast. 11 The magic-practicing priests were unable to stand before Moses because of the boils, for they had developed on the magic-practicing priests and on all the Egyptians. 12 But Jehovah allowed Pharʹaoh’s heart to become obstinate, and he did not listen to them, just as Jehovah had told Moses.13 Then Jehovah said to Moses: “Get up early in the morning and station yourself in front of Pharʹaoh, and say to him, ‘This is what Jehovah the God of the Hebrews has said: “Send my people away so that they may serve me. 14 For now I am directing all my blows to strike your heart, your servants, and your people, so that you may know that there is no one like me in all the earth. 15 For by now I could have thrust my hand out to strike you and your people with a devastating plague, and you would have been wiped out from the earth. 16 But for this very reason I have kept you in existence: to show you my power and to have my name declared in all the earth. 17 Are you still behaving arrogantly against my people by not sending them away? 18 Here I will cause a very great hail to rain down tomorrow about this time, such as has never occurred in Egypt from the day it was founded until now. 19 Therefore, send word to bring all your livestock and all that is yours in the field under shelter. Every man and beast caught in the field and not brought into the house will die when the hail comes down on them.”’”20 Anyone among Pharʹaoh’s servants who feared Jehovah’s word quickly brought his own servants and his livestock into the houses, 21 but whoever did not take Jehovah’s word to heart left his servants and his livestock in the field.22 Jehovah now said to Moses: “Stretch out your hand toward the heavens, so that hail may come down on all the land of Egypt, on man and beast and all the vegetation of the field in the land of Egypt.” 23 So Moses stretched out his rod toward the heavens, and Jehovah sent thunder and hail, and fire fell down to the earth, and Jehovah kept making it rain down hail on the land of Egypt. 24 There was hail, and there was fire flashing in the midst of the hail. It was very heavy; there had never been any like it in the land since Egypt had become a nation. 25 The hail struck everything in the field throughout the land of Egypt, from man to beast, and it struck down all the vegetation and shattered all the trees of the field. 26 Only in the land of Goʹshen, where the Israelites were, there was no hail.27 So Pharʹaoh sent for Moses and Aaron and said to them: “I have sinned this time. Jehovah is righteous, and I and my people are in the wrong. 28 Plead with Jehovah that there may be an end to God’s thunder and hail. Then I will be willing to send you away, and you will not stay any longer.” 29 So Moses said to him: “As soon as I go out of the city, I will spread out my hands before Jehovah. The thunder will stop and the hail will not continue any longer, so that you may know that the earth belongs to Jehovah. 30 But as for you and your servants, I know already that even then, you will not fear Jehovah God.”31 Now the flax and the barley had been struck down, because the barley was in the ear and the flax had flower buds. 32 But the wheat and the spelt had not been struck down, because they were later crops. 33 Moses now went out of the city from Pharʹaoh and spread out his hands before Jehovah, and the thunder and the hail stopped and the rain quit pouring down on the earth. 34 When Pharʹaoh saw that the rain, the hail, and the thunder had stopped, he sinned again and hardened his heart, he as well as his servants. 35 And Pharʹaoh’s heart continued obstinate, and he did not send the Israelites away, just as Jehovah had stated through Moses.
1 Now these are the names of Israel’s sons who came into Egypt with Jacob, each man who came with his household: 2 Reuʹben, Simʹe·on, Leʹvi, and Judah; 3 Isʹsa·char, Zebʹu·lun, and Benjamin; 4 Dan and Naphʹta·li; Gad and Ashʹer. 5 And all those who were born to Jacob were 70 people, but Joseph was already in Egypt. 6 Joseph eventually died, and also all his brothers and all that generation. 7 And the Israelites became fruitful and began to increase greatly, and they kept on multiplying and growing mightier at an extraordinary rate, so that the land became filled with them.8 In time there arose over Egypt a new king, one who did not know Joseph. 9 So he said to his people: “Look! The people of Israel are more numerous and mightier than we are. 10 Let us deal shrewdly with them. Otherwise, they will continue to multiply, and if a war breaks out, they will join our enemies and fight against us and leave the country.”11 So they appointed chiefs of forced labor over them to oppress them with hard labor, and they built storage cities for Pharʹaoh, namely, Piʹthom and Ra·amʹses. 12 But the more they would oppress them, the more they would multiply and the more they kept spreading out, so they felt sick with fear because of the Israelites. 13 Consequently, the Egyptians forced the Israelites into harsh slavery. 14 They made their life bitter with hard labor, as they worked with clay mortar and bricks and in every form of slavery in the field. Yes, they made them toil in harsh conditions in every form of slavery.15 Later the king of Egypt spoke to the Hebrew midwives whose names were Shiphʹrah and Puʹah, 16 and he told them: “When you help the Hebrew women to give birth and you see them on the stool for childbirth, you must put the child to death if it is a son; but if it is a daughter, she must live.” 17 However, the midwives feared the true God, and they did not do what the king of Egypt told them. Instead, they would keep the male children alive. 18 In time the king of Egypt called the midwives and said to them: “Why have you kept the male children alive?” 19 The midwives said to Pharʹaoh: “The Hebrew women are not like the Egyptian women. They are lively and have already given birth before the midwife can come in to them.”20 So God dealt well with the midwives, and the people kept increasing and becoming very mighty. 21 And because the midwives had feared the true God, he later gave them families. 22 Finally Pharʹaoh commanded all his people: “You are to throw every newborn son of the Hebrews into the Nile River, but you are to keep every daughter alive.”
10 Later Aaron’s sons Naʹdab and A·biʹhu each took his fire holder and put fire in it and placed incense on it. Then they began offering before Jehovah unauthorized fire, which he had not commanded them to do. 2 At this a fire came out from before Jehovah and consumed them, so that they died before Jehovah. 3 Then Moses said to Aaron: “This is what Jehovah has said, ‘I will be made holy among those near to me, and I will be glorified before all the people.’” And Aaron kept silent.4 So Moses called Mishʹa·el and El·zaʹphan, the sons of Uzʹzi·el, Aaron’s uncle, and said to them: “Come here, carry your brothers from in front of the holy place to a place outside the camp.” 5 So they came forward and carried the men away in their robes to a place outside the camp, just as Moses had told them.6 Moses then said to Aaron and his other sons El·e·aʹzar and Ithʹa·mar: “Do not let your heads go ungroomed or tear your garments, so that you may not die and that God may not become indignant against all the assembly. Your brothers of the whole house of Israel will weep over those whom Jehovah has killed by the fire. 7 You must not go out from the entrance of the tent of meeting or you will die, for Jehovah’s anointing oil is upon you.” So they did according to Moses’ word.8 Then Jehovah said to Aaron: 9 “Do not drink wine or other alcoholic beverages, you and your sons with you, when you come into the tent of meeting, so that you will not die. It is a permanent statute for your generations. 10 This is to distinguish between the holy thing and the profane and between the unclean thing and the clean, 11 and to teach the Israelites all the regulations that Jehovah has spoken to them through Moses.”12 Then Moses spoke to Aaron and to El·e·aʹzar and Ithʹa·mar, his sons who were left: “Take what was left of the grain offering from Jehovah’s offerings made by fire and eat it as unleavened bread near the altar, because it is something most holy. 13 You must eat it in a holy place, because it is your allowance and the allowance of your sons from Jehovah’s offerings made by fire, for this is what I have been commanded. 14 You will also eat the breast of the wave offering and the leg of the sacred portion in a clean place, you and your sons and your daughters with you, because these things have been given as your allowance and the allowance of your sons from the communion sacrifices of the Israelites. 15 They will bring the leg of the sacred portion and the breast of the wave offering along with the offerings of fat made by fire, in order to wave the wave offering back and forth before Jehovah; and it will serve as a permanent allowance for you and your sons with you, just as Jehovah has commanded.”16 And Moses diligently searched for the goat of the sin offering, and he discovered that it had been burned up. So he grew indignant at El·e·aʹzar and Ithʹa·mar, Aaron’s sons who were left, and he said: 17 “Why did you not eat the sin offering in the holy place, since it is something most holy and he has given it to you so that you may answer for the error of the assembly and make atonement for them before Jehovah? 18 Look! Its blood has not been brought inside the holy place. You certainly should have eaten it in the holy place, just as I was commanded.” 19 Aaron replied to Moses: “Look! Today they presented their sin offering and their burnt offering before Jehovah, and yet these things happened to me. If I had eaten the sin offering today, would that have been pleasing to Jehovah?” 20 When Moses heard that, he was satisfied.
11 Then Jehovah said to Moses and Aaron: 2 “Tell the Israelites, ‘These are the living creatures of the earth that you may eat: 3 Every animal that has a split hoof and a cleft in its hooves and that chews the cud may be eaten.4 “‘But you must not eat these animals that chew the cud or have a split hoof: the camel, which chews the cud but does not have a split hoof. It is unclean for you. 5 Also the rock badger, because it chews the cud but does not have a split hoof. It is unclean for you. 6 Also the hare, because it chews the cud but does not have a split hoof. It is unclean for you. 7 Also the pig, because it has a split hoof and a cleft in the hoof but does not chew the cud. It is unclean for you. 8 You must not eat any of their flesh or touch their dead body. They are unclean for you.9 “‘This is what you may eat of everything in the waters: Anything in the waters that has fins and scales, whether in the seas or in the rivers, it you may eat. 10 But anything in the seas and in the rivers that has no fins and scales, among all the swarming creatures and of every other living creature that is in the waters, it is a loathsome thing for you. 11 Yes, they should be loathsome to you, and you must not eat any of their flesh and you must loathe their carcasses. 12 Everything in the waters that has no fins and scales is a loathsome thing to you.13 “‘These are the flying creatures that you are to loathe; they should not be eaten, for they are loathsome: the eagle, the osprey, the black vulture, 14 the red kite and every kind of black kite, 15 every kind of raven, 16 the ostrich, the owl, the gull, every kind of falcon, 17 the little owl, the cormorant, the long-eared owl, 18 the swan, the pelican, the vulture, 19 the stork, every kind of heron, the hoopoe, and the bat. 20 Every winged swarming creature that goes on all fours is something loathsome to you.21 “‘Of the winged swarming creatures that move on all fours, you may eat only those that have jointed legs above their feet for leaping on the ground. 22 Of these you may eat: various kinds of migratory locusts, other edible locusts, crickets, and grasshoppers. 23 All other winged swarming creatures with four legs are something loathsome to you. 24 By these you would make yourselves unclean. Everyone touching their dead bodies will be unclean until the evening. 25 Anyone carrying any of their dead bodies should wash his garments; he will be unclean until the evening.26 “‘Any animal that has a split hoof but does not have a cleft and does not chew its cud is unclean to you. Everyone touching them will be unclean. 27 Every living creature that walks on paws among the creatures that walk on all fours is unclean to you. Everyone touching their dead bodies will be unclean until the evening. 28 The one who carries their dead bodies should wash his garments, and he will be unclean until the evening. They are unclean to you.29 “‘These are the swarming creatures of the earth that are unclean to you: the mole rat, the mouse, every kind of lizard, 30 the gecko, the large lizard, the newt, the sand lizard, and the chameleon. 31 These swarming creatures are unclean to you. Everyone touching their dead bodies will be unclean until the evening.32 “‘Now anything they fall on when they die will be unclean, whether a wooden utensil, a garment, a skin, or a piece of sackcloth. Any utensil that is used should be immersed in water, and it will be unclean until the evening; then it will be clean. 33 If they fall into an earthenware vessel, you are to smash it, and anything that was in it will be unclean. 34 Any kind of food that comes in contact with water from such a vessel will be unclean, and any drinkable liquid in such a vessel will be unclean. 35 Anything their dead bodies fall on will be unclean. Whether oven or small stove, it should be broken into pieces. They are unclean, and they will remain unclean to you. 36 Only a spring and a cistern for storing water will continue clean, but anyone touching their dead bodies will be unclean. 37 If their dead bodies fall on a plant seed that is to be sown, it is clean. 38 But if water is put on a seed and part of their dead body falls on it, the seed is unclean to you.39 “‘Now if an animal that you use for food dies, whoever touches its dead body will be unclean until the evening. 40 Whoever eats any of its dead body should wash his garments, and he will be unclean until the evening. Whoever carries off its dead body should wash his garments, and he will be unclean until the evening. 41 Every swarming creature of the earth is something loathsome. It must not be eaten. 42 You must not eat any creature that crawls on its belly, any creature that goes on all fours, or any of earth’s swarming creatures with a great number of legs, for they are something loathsome. 43 Do not make yourselves loathsome by means of any swarming creature, and do not defile yourselves and become unclean by them. 44 For I am Jehovah your God, and you must sanctify yourselves and become holy, because I am holy. So you must not make yourselves unclean by any swarming creature that moves on the earth. 45 For I am Jehovah, who is leading you up out of the land of Egypt to prove myself God to you, and you must be holy, because I am holy.46 “‘This is the law about the animals, the flying creatures, every living creature that moves through the waters, and concerning every creature that swarms on the earth, 47 in order to make a distinction between the unclean and the clean and between the living creatures that may be eaten and those that may not be eaten.’”
12 Jehovah went on to say to Moses: 2 “Tell the Israelites, ‘If a woman becomes pregnant and gives birth to a male, she will be unclean for seven days, just as she is in the days of the impurity when she is menstruating. 3 On the eighth day, the flesh of his foreskin will be circumcised. 4 She will continue cleansing herself from the blood for the next 33 days. She should not touch any holy thing, and she should not come into the holy place until she fulfills the days of her purification.5 “‘If she should give birth to a female, she will then be unclean for 14 days, just as she would be during her menstruation. She will continue cleansing herself from the blood for the next 66 days. 6 When the days of her purification for a son or a daughter are completed, she will bring a young ram in its first year for a burnt offering and a young pigeon or a turtledove for a sin offering to the entrance of the tent of meeting, to the priest. 7 He will present it before Jehovah and make atonement for her, and she will be clean from her flow of blood. This is the law about the woman who gives birth to either a male or a female. 8 But if she cannot afford a sheep, she must then take two turtledoves or two young pigeons, one for a burnt offering and one for a sin offering, and the priest will make atonement for her, and she will be clean.’”
13 Jehovah continued to speak to Moses and Aaron, saying: 2 “If a man develops on his skin a swelling, a scab, or a blotch and it could become the disease of leprosy on his skin, he must then be brought to Aaron the priest or to one of his sons, the priests. 3 The priest will examine the infection on his skin. When the hair in the infection has turned white and the appearance of the infection is deeper than the skin, it is the disease of leprosy. The priest will examine it and declare him unclean. 4 But if the blotch on his skin is white and its appearance is not deeper than the skin and the hair has not turned white, the priest will then quarantine the infected person for seven days. 5 The priest will then examine him on the seventh day, and if it appears that the infection has stopped and has not spread on the skin, the priest will quarantine him for another seven days.6 “The priest should examine him again on the seventh day, and if the infection has faded and has not spread in the skin, the priest will declare him clean; it was only a scab. The man will then wash his garments and be clean. 7 But if the scab has definitely spread on the skin after he appears before the priest to establish his purification, he will then appear again before the priest. 8 The priest will examine it, and if the scab has spread in the skin, the priest will then declare him unclean. It is leprosy.9 “If the disease of leprosy develops in a man, he must then be brought to the priest, 10 and the priest will examine him. If there is a white swelling on the skin and it has turned the hair white and there is an open sore in the swelling, 11 it is chronic leprosy on his skin, and the priest will declare him unclean. He should not quarantine him, for he is unclean. 12 Now if the leprosy breaks out all over the skin and the leprosy covers the person with the disease from head to foot, as far as the priest can see, 13 and the priest has examined him and sees that the leprosy has covered all his skin, he will then declare the infected person clean. All of it has turned white, and he is clean. 14 But whenever an open sore appears in it, he will be unclean. 15 When the priest sees the open sore, he will declare him unclean. The open sore is unclean. It is leprosy. 16 But if the open sore again turns white, he will then come to the priest. 17 The priest will examine him, and if the infection has turned white, the priest will then declare the infected person clean. He is clean.18 “If a person develops a boil on his skin and it heals, 19 but in the place of the boil a white swelling or a reddish-white blotch has developed, he must then show himself to the priest. 20 The priest will examine it, and if it appears to be deeper than the skin and its hair has turned white, the priest will then declare him unclean. It is the disease of leprosy that has broken out in the boil. 21 But if the priest examines it and sees that there is no white hair in it and it is not deeper than the skin and appears faded, the priest will then quarantine him for seven days. 22 And if it has clearly spread on the skin, the priest will then declare him unclean. It is a disease. 23 But if the blotch stays in one place and has not spread, it is only the inflammation from the boil, and the priest will declare him clean.24 “Or if someone has a scar from the fire and the raw flesh of the scar becomes a reddish-white blotch or a white one, 25 the priest will then examine it. If the hair in the blotch has turned white and it appears to be deeper than the skin, it is leprosy that has broken out in the scar, and the priest will declare him unclean. It is the disease of leprosy. 26 But if the priest examines it and sees that there is no white hair in the blotch and it is not deeper than the skin and it is faded, the priest will then quarantine him for seven days. 27 The priest will examine him on the seventh day, and if it has clearly spread on the skin, the priest will then declare him unclean. It is the disease of leprosy. 28 But if the blotch stays in one place and has not spread over the skin and it is faded, it is only a swelling of the scar, and the priest will declare him clean, because it is an inflammation of the scar.29 “When a man or a woman develops an infection on the head or on the chin, 30 the priest will then examine the infection. If it appears to be deeper than the skin and the hair is yellow and thin, the priest will then declare such one unclean; it is an infection of the scalp or the beard. It is leprosy of the head or of the chin. 31 But if the priest sees that the infection does not appear to be deeper than the skin and there is no black hair in it, the priest should quarantine the infected person for seven days. 32 The priest will examine the infection on the seventh day, and if the infected area has not spread and no yellow hair has developed in it and the appearance of the infected area is not deeper than the skin, 33 the person should have himself shaved, but he will not have the infected area shaved. Then the priest will quarantine the infected person for seven days.34 “The priest will again examine the infected area on the seventh day, and if the infection of the scalp and beard has not spread on the skin and it does not appear deeper than the skin, the priest must then declare him clean, and he should wash his garments and be clean. 35 But if the infection clearly spreads on the skin after his purification, 36 the priest will examine him, and if the infection has spread on the skin, the priest does not need to look for yellow hair; that person is unclean. 37 But if the examination shows that the infection has not spread and black hair has grown on it, the infection has been healed. He is clean, and the priest will declare him clean.38 “If a man or a woman develops blotches on the skin and the blotches are white, 39 the priest will examine them. If the skin blotches are faded white, it is a harmless rash that has broken out on the skin. That person is clean.40 “If a man loses the hair of his head and becomes bald, he is clean. 41 If he loses the hair on the front of his head and becomes bald there, he is clean. 42 But if a reddish-white sore develops on the bald part of his scalp or on his forehead, it is leprosy breaking out on his scalp or on his forehead. 43 The priest will examine him, and if the swelling from the infection is reddish-white on the bald spot on top of his head or on his forehead and it looks like leprosy on his skin, 44 he is a leper. He is unclean, and the priest should declare him unclean because of the disease on his head. 45 As for the leper who has the disease, his garments should be torn and his head should be left ungroomed and he should cover over his mustache and call out, ‘Unclean, unclean!’ 46 He will be unclean the whole time that he has the disease. Since he is unclean, he should live in isolation. His dwelling place will be outside the camp.47 “If the disease of leprosy contaminates a garment, whether a woolen or a linen garment, 48 either in the warp or in the woof of the linen or of the wool, or in a skin or in anything made of skin, 49 and the yellowish-green or reddish stain from the disease contaminates the garment, a skin, the warp, the woof, or any article of skin, it is a contamination from leprosy, and it should be shown to the priest. 50 The priest will examine the disease, and he must quarantine the disease for seven days. 51 When he examines the disease on the seventh day and sees that it has spread in the garment, in the warp, in the woof, or in the skin (regardless of what the skin is used for), the disease is malignant leprosy, and it is unclean. 52 He should burn the garment or the warp or the woof in the wool or in the linen or any article of skin in which the disease has developed, for it is malignant leprosy. It should be burned in the fire.53 “But if the priest examines it and the disease has not spread in the garment or in the warp or in the woof or in any article of skin, 54 the priest will then command that they should wash the contaminated item, and he will quarantine it for another seven days. 55 The priest will then examine the contaminated item after it has been thoroughly washed. If the appearance of the contamination has not changed, even if the disease has not spread, it is unclean. You should burn it in the fire because it has been eaten away, either from its underside or from its outside.56 “But if the priest has examined it and the contaminated part is faded after it has been thoroughly washed, he will then tear it out of the garment or the skin or the warp or the woof. 57 However, if it still appears in another part of the garment or in the warp or in the woof or in any article of skin, it is spreading, and you should burn any contaminated item in the fire. 58 But when the contamination disappears from the garment or the warp or the woof or any article of skin that you wash, it should then be washed a second time, and it will be clean.59 “This is the law of the disease of leprosy in a garment of wool or of linen, or in the warp or in the woof, or in any article of skin, for declaring it clean or unclean.”
14 Jehovah continued to speak to Moses, saying: 2 “This is to be the law of the leper on the day his purification is established, when he is to be brought to the priest. 3 The priest will go outside the camp and examine him. If the leper has been cured of the leprosy, 4 the priest will command him to bring two live clean birds, cedarwood, scarlet material, and hyssop for his cleansing. 5 The priest will command that the one bird be killed in an earthenware vessel over running water. 6 But he should take the living bird along with the cedarwood, the scarlet material, and the hyssop, and dip them together in the blood of the bird that was killed over the running water. 7 Then he will spatter it seven times on the one cleansing himself from the leprosy and declare him clean, and he will set the living bird free in the open field.8 “The one cleansing himself must wash his garments and shave off all his hair and bathe in water, and he will be clean. Afterward, he may come into the camp, but he will dwell outside his tent for seven days. 9 On the seventh day, he should shave off all the hair on his head and his chin and his eyebrows. After he shaves off all his hair, he will wash his garments and bathe himself in water, and he will be clean.10 “On the eighth day, he will take two sound young rams, one sound female lamb in its first year, three tenths of an eʹphah of fine flour mixed with oil as a grain offering, and one log measure of oil; 11 and the priest who declares him clean will present the man who is cleansing himself, along with the offerings, before Jehovah at the entrance of the tent of meeting. 12 The priest will take the one young ram and offer it as a guilt offering together with the log measure of oil, and he will wave them back and forth as a wave offering before Jehovah. 13 Then he will slaughter the young ram in the place where the sin offering and the burnt offering are usually slaughtered, in a holy place, because, like the sin offering, the guilt offering belongs to the priest. It is something most holy.14 “Then the priest will take some of the blood of the guilt offering, and the priest will put it on the right earlobe of the one cleansing himself and on the thumb of his right hand and on the big toe of his right foot. 15 And the priest will take some of the log measure of oil and pour it into his own left palm. 16 The priest will then dip his right finger into the oil that is in his left palm and spatter some of the oil with his finger seven times before Jehovah. 17 Then the priest will put some of the remaining oil in his palm on the right earlobe of the one cleansing himself and on the thumb of his right hand and on the big toe of his right foot over the blood of the guilt offering. 18 The priest will put what is left over of the oil in his palm on the head of the one cleansing himself, and the priest will make atonement for him before Jehovah.19 “The priest will sacrifice the sin offering and make atonement for the one cleansing himself from his impurity, and afterward he will slaughter the burnt offering. 20 And the priest will offer up the burnt offering and the grain offering on the altar, and the priest will make atonement for him, and he will be clean.21 “However, if he is poor and does not have enough means, he will then take one young ram as a guilt offering for a wave offering, in order to make atonement for himself, along with one tenth of an eʹphah of fine flour mixed with oil as a grain offering, a log measure of oil, 22 and two turtledoves or two young pigeons, according to his means. The one will serve as a sin offering, and the other as a burnt offering. 23 On the eighth day, he will bring them for establishing his purification to the priest at the entrance of the tent of meeting before Jehovah.24 “The priest will take the young ram of the guilt offering and the log measure of oil, and the priest will wave them back and forth as a wave offering before Jehovah. 25 He will then slaughter the young ram of the guilt offering, and the priest will take some of the blood of the guilt offering and put it on the right earlobe of the one cleansing himself and on the thumb of his right hand and on the big toe of his right foot. 26 The priest will pour some of the oil into his own left palm, 27 and he will then spatter with his right finger some of the oil that is in his left palm seven times before Jehovah. 28 And the priest will put some of the oil that is in his palm on the right earlobe of the one cleansing himself and on the thumb of his right hand and on the big toe of his right foot on the same places that he put the blood of the guilt offering. 29 The priest will then put what is left over of the oil in his palm on the head of the one cleansing himself, in order to make atonement for him before Jehovah.30 “He will offer up one of the turtledoves or one of the young pigeons, according to his means, 31 the one he can afford, as a sin offering and the other as a burnt offering along with the grain offering; and the priest will make atonement for the one cleansing himself before Jehovah.32 “This is the law for the one in whom the disease of leprosy was but who does not have the means when establishing his purification.”33 Then Jehovah said to Moses and Aaron: 34 “When you come into the land of Caʹnaan, which I am giving you as a possession, and I contaminate a house in your land with the disease of leprosy, 35 the one to whom the house belongs should then come and tell the priest, ‘Some kind of contamination has appeared in my house.’ 36 The priest will give orders to clear out the house before he comes to examine the contamination, in order that he may not declare everything that is in the house unclean; and after that the priest will come in to inspect the house. 37 He will examine the affected area, and if the walls of the house are contaminated with yellowish-green or reddish depressions and they appear to be deeper than the wall surface, 38 the priest will then go out of the house to the entryway of the house and quarantine the house for seven days.39 “Then the priest will return on the seventh day and make an inspection. If the contamination has spread in the walls of the house, 40 the priest will then give orders, and the contaminated stones must be torn out and thrown outside the city into an unclean place. 41 Then he is to have the inside of the house thoroughly scraped, and the plaster and mortar that is removed should be discarded outside the city in an unclean place. 42 They will then insert other stones in the place of the stones they removed, and he should use different mortar and have the house plastered.43 “If, though, the contamination returns and breaks out in the house after the stones were torn out and the house was scraped and replastered, 44 the priest will then go in and inspect it. If the contamination has spread in the house, it is malignant leprosy in the house. The house is unclean. 45 He will then have the house pulled down—its stones, its timbers, and all the plaster and mortar of the house—and carried outside the city to an unclean place. 46 But whoever enters the house any of the days it is quarantined will be unclean until the evening; 47 and whoever lies down in the house should wash his garments, and whoever eats in the house should wash his garments.48 “However, if the priest comes and sees that the contamination has not spread in the house after the house was replastered, the priest will then declare the house clean, because the contamination has been healed. 49 In order to purify the house from uncleanness, he will take two birds, cedarwood, scarlet material, and hyssop. 50 He is to kill the one bird in an earthenware vessel over running water. 51 Then he will take the cedarwood, the hyssop, the scarlet material, and the live bird and dip them in the blood of the bird that was killed and in the running water, and he must spatter it toward the house seven times. 52 And he will purify the house from uncleanness with the blood of the bird, the running water, the live bird, the cedarwood, the hyssop, and the scarlet material. 53 He will then set the live bird free outside the city in the open field and make atonement for the house, and it will be clean.54 “This is the law respecting any case of leprosy, infection of the scalp or the beard, 55 leprosy of the garment or the house, 56 and respecting swellings, scabs, and blotches, 57 in order to determine when something is unclean and when something is clean. This is the law about leprosy.”
15 Jehovah continued to speak to Moses and Aaron, saying: 2 “Speak to the Israelites and tell them, ‘If a man has a discharge from his genital organ, this discharge makes him unclean. 3 He is unclean from the discharge, whether the discharge continues to flow from his genitals or is obstructed, he is still unclean.4 “‘Any bed that the one with the discharge lies on will be unclean, and anything he sits on will be unclean. 5 A man who touches his bed must wash his garments, and he should bathe in water and be unclean until the evening. 6 Anyone who sits on an article that the one having a discharge sat on should wash his garments, bathe in water, and be unclean until the evening. 7 Whoever touches the flesh of the one having a discharge should wash his garments, bathe in water, and be unclean until the evening. 8 If the one who has a discharge spits on someone clean, that person must wash his garments, bathe in water, and be unclean until the evening. 9 Any saddle that the one with the discharge rides on will be unclean. 10 Anyone touching anything that was under him will be unclean until the evening, and anyone who carries those items will wash his garments, bathe in water, and be unclean until the evening. 11 If the one with the discharge has not washed his hands in water and he touches someone, that person must then wash his garments, bathe in water, and be unclean until the evening. 12 An earthenware vessel that the one having a discharge touches should be smashed, and any wooden vessel should be washed with water.13 “‘When the discharge stops and the person becomes clean from it, he will then count seven days for his purification, and he must wash his garments, bathe himself in running water, and he will be clean. 14 On the eighth day, he should take two turtledoves or two young pigeons and come before Jehovah at the entrance of the tent of meeting and give them to the priest. 15 And the priest will offer them, the one as a sin offering and the other as a burnt offering, and the priest will make atonement for him before Jehovah concerning his discharge.16 “‘Now if a man has an emission of semen, he should bathe his whole body in water and be unclean until the evening. 17 He must wash with water any garment and any skin with semen on it, and it will be unclean until the evening.18 “‘When a man lies with a woman and has an emission of semen, they should bathe in water and be unclean until the evening.19 “‘If a woman has a discharge of blood from her body, she will continue in her menstrual impurity for seven days. Anyone touching her will be unclean until the evening. 20 Anything she lies down on in her menstrual impurity will be unclean, and everything she sits on will be unclean. 21 Anyone touching her bed should wash his garments, bathe in water, and be unclean until the evening. 22 Anyone touching any article she sat on should wash his garments, bathe in water, and be unclean until the evening. 23 If she sat on the bed or on another article, his touching it will make him unclean until the evening. 24 And if a man lies down with her and her menstrual impurity comes on him, he will then be unclean for seven days, and any bed on which he lies down will be unclean.25 “‘When a woman’s discharge of blood flows for many days when it is not the regular time of her menstruation, or if she should have a flow longer than her usual menstruation, she will be unclean during all the days of her discharge, as in the days of her menstrual impurity. 26 Any bed she lies on during the days of her discharge will become like the bed of her menstrual impurity, and any article she sits on will become unclean like the uncleanness of her menstrual impurity. 27 Anyone touching them will be unclean, and he must wash his garments, bathe in water, and be unclean until the evening.28 “‘However, when she is clean from her discharge, she will count for herself seven days, and afterward she will be clean. 29 On the eighth day, she should take two turtledoves or two young pigeons, and she will bring them to the priest at the entrance of the tent of meeting. 30 The priest will make the one a sin offering and the other a burnt offering, and the priest will make atonement for her before Jehovah concerning her unclean discharge.31 “‘Thus you must keep the Israelites separate from their uncleanness, so that they do not die in their uncleanness by defiling my tabernacle, which is in their midst.32 “‘This is the law about the man having a discharge, the man who is unclean because of an emission of semen, 33 the woman during her menstrual impurity, any male or female who has a discharge flowing from the body, and a man who lies down with an unclean woman.’”
16 Jehovah spoke to Moses after the death of Aaron’s two sons who died for approaching Jehovah. 2 Jehovah said to Moses: “Tell Aaron your brother that he may not come at just any time into the holy place inside the curtain, in front of the cover on the Ark, so that he may not die, for I will appear over the cover in a cloud.3 “This is what Aaron should bring when he comes into the holy place: a young bull for a sin offering and a ram for a burnt offering. 4 He should put on the holy linen robe, and the linen shorts should cover his body, and he should wrap himself with the linen sash and his head with the linen turban. They are holy garments. He will bathe himself in water and put them on.5 “He should take from the assembly of the Israelites two young male goats for a sin offering and one ram for a burnt offering.6 “Aaron must then present the bull of the sin offering, which is for himself, and he will make atonement in behalf of himself and his house.7 “He will then take the two goats and make them stand before Jehovah at the entrance of the tent of meeting. 8 Aaron will draw lots over the two goats, the one lot for Jehovah and the other lot for A·zaʹzel. 9 Aaron will present the goat that was designated by lot for Jehovah and make it a sin offering. 10 But the goat designated by lot for A·zaʹzel should be brought alive to stand before Jehovah in order to perform the atonement upon it, so that it may be sent away for A·zaʹzel into the wilderness.11 “Aaron will present the bull of the sin offering, which is for himself, and make atonement in behalf of himself and his house; afterward he will slaughter the bull of the sin offering, which is for himself.12 “He will then take the fire holder full of burning coals from the altar before Jehovah and two handfuls of fine perfumed incense, and he will bring them inside the curtain. 13 He will also put the incense on the fire before Jehovah, and the cloud of the incense will envelop the Ark cover, which is on the Testimony, so that he may not die.14 “He will take some of the bull’s blood and spatter it with his finger in front of the cover on the east side, and he will spatter some of the blood with his finger seven times before the cover.15 “He will then slaughter the goat of the sin offering, which is for the people, and bring its blood inside the curtain and do with its blood the same as he did with the bull’s blood; he is to spatter it toward the cover and before the cover.16 “He must make atonement for the holy place concerning the acts of uncleanness of the Israelites and concerning their transgressions and their sins, and that is what he should do for the tent of meeting, which is located among them in the midst of their acts of uncleanness.17 “No other man should be in the tent of meeting from the time he goes in to make atonement in the holy place until he comes out. He will make atonement in behalf of himself and his house and in behalf of the entire congregation of Israel.18 “He will then come out to the altar, which is before Jehovah, and make atonement for it, and he will take some of the bull’s blood and some of the goat’s blood and put it on the horns of the altar on all sides. 19 He will also spatter some of the blood on it with his finger seven times and cleanse it and sanctify it from the acts of uncleanness of the Israelites.20 “When he has finished making atonement for the holy place and the tent of meeting and the altar, he will also present the live goat. 21 Aaron will lay both his hands on the head of the live goat and confess over it all the errors of the Israelites and all their transgressions and all their sins, and he will put them on the head of the goat and send it away into the wilderness by the hand of a man designated to do this. 22 The goat will carry upon itself all their errors into a desert land, and he will send the goat away into the wilderness.23 “Aaron will then enter into the tent of meeting and take off the linen garments that he put on when he went into the holy place, and he will lay them down there. 24 He must bathe himself in water in a holy place and put on his garments; then he will come out and offer up his burnt offering and the people’s burnt offering and make atonement in his own behalf and in behalf of the people. 25 He will make the fat of the sin offering smoke on the altar.26 “The man who sent away the goat for A·zaʹzel should wash his garments and bathe himself in water, and after that he may come into the camp.27 “And the bull of the sin offering and the goat of the sin offering, whose blood was brought into the holy place to make atonement, will be taken outside the camp, and their skins and their flesh and their dung will be burned in the fire. 28 The one who burns them should wash his garments and bathe himself in water, and after that he may come into the camp.29 “It will serve as a lasting statute for you: In the seventh month, on the tenth of the month, you should afflict yourselves, and you must not do any work, whether a native or a foreigner who is residing among you. 30 On this day atonement will be made for you, to declare you clean. You will be clean from all your sins before Jehovah. 31 It is a sabbath of complete rest for you, and you should afflict yourselves. It is a lasting statute.32 “The priest who is anointed and installed to serve as priest in place of his father will make atonement and put on the linen garments, the holy garments. 33 He will make atonement for the holy sanctuary, the tent of meeting, and the altar; and he will make atonement for the priests and for all the people of the congregation. 34 This will serve as a lasting statute for you, to make atonement for the Israelites concerning all their sins once each year.”So he did just as Jehovah had commanded Moses.
17 Jehovah went on to say to Moses: 2 “Speak to Aaron and his sons and all the Israelites and say to them, ‘This is what Jehovah has commanded:3 “‘“If any man of the house of Israel slaughters a bull or a young ram or a goat in the camp or if he slaughters it outside the camp, 4 instead of bringing it to the entrance of the tent of meeting to present it as an offering to Jehovah before the tabernacle of Jehovah, bloodguilt will be counted to that man. He has shed blood, and that man must be cut off from among his people. 5 This is so that the Israelites will bring the sacrifices, which they now sacrifice in the open field, to Jehovah, to the entrance of the tent of meeting, to the priest. They are to sacrifice these as communion sacrifices to Jehovah. 6 And the priest will sprinkle the blood on Jehovah’s altar at the entrance of the tent of meeting and make the fat smoke as a pleasing aroma to Jehovah. 7 So they should no longer offer sacrifices to the goatlike demons, with which they are prostituting themselves. This will serve as a lasting statute for you throughout your generations.”’8 “You should say to them, ‘Any man of the house of Israel or any foreigner who is residing in your midst who offers up a burnt offering or a sacrifice 9 and does not bring it to the entrance of the tent of meeting to offer it to Jehovah must be cut off from his people.10 “‘If any man of the house of Israel or any foreigner who is residing in your midst eats any sort of blood, I will certainly set my face against the one who is eating the blood, and I will cut him off from among his people. 11 For the life of the flesh is in the blood, and I myself have given it on the altar for you to make atonement for yourselves, because it is the blood that makes atonement by means of the life in it. 12 That is why I have said to the Israelites: “None of you should eat blood, and no foreigner who is residing in your midst should eat blood.”13 “‘If one of the Israelites or some foreigner who is residing in your midst is hunting and catches a wild animal or a bird that may be eaten, he must pour its blood out and cover it with dust. 14 For the life of every sort of flesh is its blood, because the life is in it. Consequently, I said to the Israelites: “You must not eat the blood of any sort of flesh because the life of every sort of flesh is its blood. Anyone eating it will be cut off.” 15 If anyone, whether a native or a foreigner, eats an animal found dead or one torn by a wild animal, he must then wash his garments and bathe in water and be unclean until the evening; then he will be clean. 16 But if he does not wash them and does not bathe himself, he will answer for his error.’”
18 Jehovah continued to speak to Moses, saying: 2 “Speak to the Israelites and say to them, ‘I am Jehovah your God. 3 You must not behave as they do in the land of Egypt, where you were dwelling, and you must not do what they do in the land of Caʹnaan, where I am bringing you. And you must not walk in their statutes. 4 You should carry out my judicial decisions, and you should keep my statutes and walk in them. I am Jehovah your God. 5 You must keep my statutes and my judicial decisions; anyone who does so will live by means of them. I am Jehovah.6 “‘No man among you should approach any of his close relatives to have sexual relations. I am Jehovah. 7 You must not have sexual relations with your father, and you must not have sexual relations with your mother. She is your mother, and you must not have sexual relations with her.8 “‘You must not have sexual relations with your father’s wife. It is exposing your father to shame.9 “‘You must not have sexual relations with your sister, either the daughter of your father or the daughter of your mother, whether she is born in the same household or born outside of it.10 “‘You must not have sexual relations with the daughter of your son or the daughter of your daughter, because they are your own nakedness.11 “‘You must not have sexual relations with the daughter of your father’s wife, the offspring of your father, because she is your sister.12 “‘You must not have sexual relations with your father’s sister. She is your father’s blood relative.13 “‘You must not have sexual relations with your mother’s sister, because she is your mother’s blood relative.14 “‘You must not expose your father’s brother to shame by having sexual relations with his wife. She is your aunt.15 “‘You must not have sexual relations with your daughter-in-law. She is your son’s wife, and you must not have relations with her.16 “‘You must not have sexual relations with your brother’s wife, because it is exposing your brother to shame.17 “‘You must not have sexual relations with a woman and her daughter. You must not take the daughter of her son and the daughter of her daughter in order to have relations. They are her close relatives; it is an obscene act.18 “‘You must not take a woman in addition to her sister as a rival wife and have sexual relations with her while her sister is alive.19 “‘You must not approach a woman during her menstrual impurity to have sexual relations with her.20 “‘You must not have sexual intercourse with the wife of your fellow man, making yourself unclean.21 “‘You must not allow any of your offspring to be offered to Moʹlech. You must not profane the name of your God in that way. I am Jehovah.22 “‘You must not lie down with a male in the same way that you lie down with a woman. It is a detestable act.23 “‘A man must not have sexual intercourse with an animal to become unclean by it; nor should a woman offer herself to an animal to have intercourse with it. It is a violation of what is natural.24 “‘Do not make yourselves unclean by any of these things, for it is by all these things that the nations that I am driving out from before you have made themselves unclean. 25 Therefore, the land is unclean, and I will bring punishment on it for its error, and the land will vomit its inhabitants out. 26 But you yourselves must keep my statutes and my judicial decisions, and you must not do any of these detestable things, whether a native or a foreigner who is residing among you. 27 For all these detestable things were done by the men who lived in the land before you, and now the land is unclean. 28 Then the land will not have to vomit you out for defiling it in the same way that it will vomit out the nations that were before you. 29 If anyone does any of these detestable things, all those doing them must be cut off from among their people. 30 You must keep your obligation to me by not practicing any of the detestable customs that were carried on before you, so that you do not make yourselves unclean by them. I am Jehovah your God.’”
19 Jehovah spoke further to Moses, saying: 2 “Speak to the entire assembly of the Israelites and tell them, ‘You should be holy, because I, Jehovah your God, am holy.3 “‘Each of you should respect his mother and his father, and you should keep my sabbaths. I am Jehovah your God. 4 Do not turn to worthless gods or make for yourselves gods of cast metal. I am Jehovah your God.5 “‘Now if you offer a communion sacrifice to Jehovah, you should sacrifice it in such a way that you gain approval for yourselves. 6 It should be eaten on the day of your sacrifice and on the next day, but what is left over until the third day should be burned in the fire. 7 If, though, any of it is eaten on the third day, it is an offensive thing that will not be accepted with approval. 8 The one eating it will answer for his error because he has profaned a holy thing of Jehovah, and that person must be cut off from his people.9 “‘When you reap the harvest of your land, you must not reap the edge of your field completely and you must not pick up the gleaning of your harvest. 10 Also, you must not gather the leftovers of your vineyard or pick up the scattered grapes of your vineyard. You should leave them for the poor and the foreign resident. I am Jehovah your God.11 “‘You must not steal, you must not deceive, and you must not deal falsely with one another. 12 You must not swear to a lie in my name and thus profane the name of your God. I am Jehovah. 13 You must not defraud your fellow man, and you must not rob. You should not withhold the wages of a hired worker all night until morning.14 “‘You must not curse a deaf man or put an obstacle before a blind man, and you must be in fear of your God. I am Jehovah.15 “‘You must not be unjust in your judgment. You must not show partiality to the poor or show preference to the rich. With justice you should judge your fellow man.16 “‘You must not go around spreading slander among your people. You must not stand up against the life of your fellow man. I am Jehovah.17 “‘You must not hate your brother in your heart. You should by all means reprove your fellow man, so that you will not bear sin along with him.18 “‘You must not take vengeance nor hold a grudge against the sons of your people, and you must love your fellow man as yourself. I am Jehovah.19 “‘You should keep my statutes: You must not interbreed two sorts of your domestic animals. You must not sow your field with two sorts of seed, and you must not wear a garment made with two sorts of thread mixed together.20 “‘Now if a man lies down with a woman and has intercourse with her and she is a servant who is designated for another man, but she has not been redeemed or given her freedom, there should be a punishment. However, they should not be put to death, for she was not yet set free. 21 He should bring his guilt offering to Jehovah to the entrance of the tent of meeting, a ram of guilt offering. 22 The priest will make atonement for him with the ram of the guilt offering before Jehovah for the sin that he committed, and he will be forgiven for the sin that he committed.23 “‘When you come into the land and you plant any tree for food, you must consider its fruitage impure and forbidden. For three years it will be forbidden to you. It must not be eaten. 24 But in the fourth year, all its fruit will be holy for rejoicing before Jehovah. 25 Then in the fifth year, you may eat its fruit in order to add its produce to your harvest. I am Jehovah your God.26 “‘You must eat nothing containing blood.“‘You must not look for omens or practice magic.27 “‘You must not shave the hair on the side of your head or disfigure the edges of your beard.28 “‘You must not make cuts in your flesh for a dead person, and you must not make tattoo markings on yourselves. I am Jehovah.29 “‘Do not dishonor your daughter by making her a prostitute, so that the land may not commit prostitution and be filled with loose morals.30 “‘You must keep my sabbaths, and you must show reverence for my sanctuary. I am Jehovah.31 “‘Do not turn to the spirit mediums, and do not consult fortune-tellers so as to become unclean by them. I am Jehovah your God.32 “‘Before gray hair you should rise up, and you must show honor to an older man, and you must be in fear of your God. I am Jehovah.33 “‘If a foreigner resides with you in your land, you must not mistreat him. 34 The foreigner who resides with you should become to you like a native among you; and you must love him as yourself, for you were foreign residents in the land of Egypt. I am Jehovah your God.35 “‘You must not use dishonest standards in measuring length, weight, or volume. 36 You should use accurate scales, accurate weights, an accurate dry measure, and an accurate liquid measure. I am Jehovah your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt. 37 So you must keep all my statutes and all my judicial decisions, and you must follow them. I am Jehovah.’”
2 “‘Now if someone presents a grain offering to Jehovah, his offering must be fine flour, and he should pour oil on it and put frankincense on it. 2 Then he will bring it to the sons of Aaron, the priests, and the priest will take a handful of the fine flour and oil and all its frankincense, and he will make it smoke as a token offering on the altar, an offering made by fire of a pleasing aroma to Jehovah. 3 Whatever is left of the grain offering belongs to Aaron and his sons as something most holy from Jehovah’s offerings made by fire.4 “‘If you present a grain offering that has been baked in the oven, it should be of fine flour, unleavened ring-shaped loaves mixed with oil or unleavened wafers spread with oil.5 “‘If your offering is a grain offering from the griddle, it should be of fine, unleavened flour mixed with oil. 6 It should be broken into pieces, and you are to pour oil on it. It is a grain offering.7 “‘If your offering is a grain offering prepared in a pan, it should be made of fine flour with oil. 8 You should bring the grain offering that was made of these to Jehovah, and it will be presented to the priest, who will bring it near to the altar. 9 And the priest will lift off some of the grain offering as a token offering and make it smoke on the altar as an offering made by fire of a pleasing aroma to Jehovah. 10 What is left of the grain offering belongs to Aaron and his sons as something most holy of Jehovah’s offerings by fire.11 “‘No grain offering that you present to Jehovah should be leavened, for you must not make any sourdough or honey smoke as an offering made by fire to Jehovah.12 “‘You may present them to Jehovah as an offering of the firstfruits, but they must not be brought to the altar as a pleasing aroma.13 “‘Every grain offering you make is to be seasoned with salt; and you must not allow the salt of the covenant of your God to be missing from your grain offering. Along with every offering of yours, you will present salt.14 “‘If you present the grain offering of the first ripe fruits to Jehovah, you should present new grain roasted with fire, coarsely crushed new kernels, as the grain offering of your first ripe fruits. 15 You are to put oil on it and place frankincense on it. It is a grain offering. 16 The priest will make it smoke as a token offering, that is, some of the coarse grain and oil along with all its frankincense, as an offering made by fire to Jehovah.
20 Jehovah went on speaking to Moses, saying: 2 “You are to say to the Israelites, ‘Any man of Israel and any foreigner who resides in Israel who gives any of his offspring to Moʹlech should be put to death without fail. The people of the land should stone him to death. 3 I myself will set my face against that man, and I will cut him off from among his people, because he has given some of his offspring to Moʹlech and has defiled my holy place and has profaned my holy name. 4 If the people of the land should deliberately close their eyes to what that man does when he gives his offspring to Moʹlech and they do not put him to death, 5 then I myself will certainly set my face against that man and his family. I will cut off that man from his people along with all who join him in prostituting themselves to Moʹlech.6 “‘As for the person who turns to the spirit mediums and the fortune-tellers so as to commit spiritual prostitution with them, I will certainly turn against that person and cut him off from his people.7 “‘You must sanctify yourselves and become holy, because I am Jehovah your God. 8 And you must keep my statutes and carry them out. I am Jehovah, who is sanctifying you.9 “‘If there is any man who curses his father or his mother, he should be put to death without fail. Since he has cursed his father or his mother, his own blood is upon him.10 “‘Now regarding a man who commits adultery with another man’s wife: The one who commits adultery with the wife of his fellow man should be put to death without fail, the adulterer and the adulteress. 11 A man who lies down with his father’s wife has exposed his father to shame. Both of them should be put to death without fail. Their own blood is upon them. 12 If a man lies down with his daughter-in-law, both of them should be put to death without fail. They have violated what is natural. Their own blood is upon them.13 “‘If a man lies down with a male the same as one lies down with a woman, both of them have done a detestable thing. They should be put to death without fail. Their own blood is upon them.14 “‘If a man takes a woman and her mother, it is an obscene act. They should burn him and them in the fire, so that obscene conduct may not continue among you.15 “‘If a man has intercourse with a beast, he should be put to death without fail, and you should kill the beast. 16 If a woman approaches any beast to have intercourse with it, you must kill the woman and the beast. They should be put to death without fail. Their own blood is upon them.17 “‘If a man has sexual relations with his sister, the daughter of his father or the daughter of his mother, and he sees her nakedness and she sees his nakedness, it is a disgrace. They must be cut off before the eyes of the sons of their people. He has exposed his sister to shame. He should answer for his error.18 “‘If a man lies down with a menstruating woman and has sexual relations with her, both he and she have exposed her flow of blood. Both of them must be cut off from among their people.19 “‘You must not have sexual relations with your mother’s sister or your father’s sister, because that would be exposing a blood relative to shame. They should answer for their error. 20 A man who lies down with his uncle’s wife has exposed his uncle to shame. They should answer for their sin. They should die childless. 21 If a man takes his brother’s wife, it is something abhorrent. He has exposed his brother to shame. They should become childless.22 “‘You must keep all my statutes and all my judicial decisions and carry them out, so that the land where I am bringing you to dwell will not vomit you out. 23 You must not walk in the statutes of the nations that I am driving out from before you; for they have done all these things and I abhor them. 24 That is why I said to you: “You will take possession of their land, and I will give it to you as your possession, a land flowing with milk and honey. Jehovah your God I am, who has set you apart from the peoples.” 25 You must make a distinction between the clean animal and the unclean and between the unclean bird and the clean; you must not make yourselves loathsome by means of an animal or a bird or anything that creeps on the ground that I set apart for you to regard as unclean. 26 You must be holy to me, because I, Jehovah, am holy, and I am setting you apart from the peoples to become mine.27 “‘Any man or woman who acts as a spirit medium or is a fortune-teller should be put to death without fail. The people should stone them to death. Their own blood is upon them.’”
21 Jehovah went on to say to Moses: “Talk to the priests, Aaron’s sons, and say to them, ‘No one should defile himself for a dead person among his people. 2 But he may do so for a close blood relative, for his mother, his father, his son, his daughter, his brother, 3 and he may defile himself for his sister if she is a virgin who is near to him and has not yet married. 4 He may not defile himself and make himself profane for a woman who belongs to a husband of his people. 5 They should not make their heads bald or shave off the fringe of their beard or make cuts on their body. 6 They should be holy to their God, and they should not profane the name of their God, for they are presenting Jehovah’s offerings made by fire, the bread of their God, and they must be holy. 7 They should not marry a prostitute, a woman who has been defiled, or a woman divorced from her husband, because the priest is holy to his God. 8 You must sanctify him, because he is one presenting the bread of your God. He should be holy to you, because I, Jehovah, the one sanctifying you, am holy.9 “‘Now if the daughter of a priest should profane herself by committing prostitution, she is profaning her father. She should be burned in the fire.10 “‘The high priest of his brothers, on whose head the anointing oil is poured and who has been installed to wear the priestly garments, should not let his head go ungroomed or tear his garments. 11 He should not approach any dead person; he may not defile himself even for his father or his mother. 12 He should not go out from the sanctuary and should not profane the sanctuary of his God, for the sign of dedication, the anointing oil of his God, is upon him. I am Jehovah.13 “‘He must take as a wife a woman who is a virgin. 14 He may not marry a widow, a divorced woman, one who has been defiled, or a prostitute; but he should take a virgin from his people as a wife. 15 He should not profane his offspring among his people, for I am Jehovah, who is sanctifying him.’”16 Jehovah continued to speak to Moses, saying: 17 “Tell Aaron, ‘No man of your offspring throughout their generations who has a defect may approach to present the bread of his God. 18 If there is any man who has a defect, he may not approach: a man who is blind or lame or has a disfigured face or one limb too long, 19 a man with a fractured foot or a fractured hand, 20 a hunchback or a dwarf, or a man with an eye defect or eczema or ringworm or damaged testicles. 21 No man of the offspring of Aaron the priest who has a defect may approach to present Jehovah’s offerings made by fire. Because he has a defect, he may not approach to present the bread of his God. 22 He may eat the bread of his God from the most holy things and from the holy things. 23 However, he may not come near the curtain, and he may not approach the altar, because there is a defect in him; and he should not profane my sanctuary, for I am Jehovah, who is sanctifying them.’”24 So Moses spoke to Aaron and his sons and all the Israelites.
22 Jehovah spoke further to Moses, saying: 2 “Tell Aaron and his sons that they should be careful how they handle the holy things of the Israelites and not profane my holy name regarding the things they are sanctifying to me. I am Jehovah. 3 Say to them, ‘Throughout your generations, any of your offspring who, while he is unclean, comes near to the holy things that the Israelites sanctify to Jehovah, that person will be cut off from before me. I am Jehovah. 4 No man of Aaron’s offspring who has leprosy or a discharge may eat of the holy things until he becomes clean, neither the man who touches someone who became unclean by a dead person, nor a man who has a seminal emission, 5 nor a man who touches an unclean swarming creature or who touches a man who is unclean for any reason and who can make him unclean. 6 The person who touches any of these will be unclean until the evening and may not eat any of the holy things, but he should bathe himself in water. 7 When the sun has set, he will be clean, and afterward he may eat some of the holy things because it is his food. 8 Also, he should not eat any animal found dead or anything torn by wild animals and become unclean by it. I am Jehovah.9 “‘They must keep their obligation to me, so that they may not incur sin because of it and have to die for it because they were profaning it. I am Jehovah, who is sanctifying them.10 “‘No unauthorized person may eat anything holy. No foreign guest of a priest or hired worker may eat anything holy. 11 But if a priest should purchase someone with his own money, that person may share in eating it. Slaves born in his house may also share in eating his food. 12 If the daughter of a priest should marry someone who is not a priest, she may not eat of the contribution of the holy things. 13 But if the daughter of a priest should become a widow or is divorced and she has no offspring and she returns to her father’s house as in her youth, she may eat some of her father’s food; but no unauthorized person may eat it.14 “‘Now if a man eats a holy thing by mistake, he must add a fifth of its value and give the holy offering to the priest. 15 So they should not profane the holy things of the Israelites that they contribute to Jehovah 16 and cause themselves to incur punishment for their guilt because of eating their holy things; for I am Jehovah, who is sanctifying them.’”17 Jehovah continued speaking to Moses, saying: 18 “Speak to Aaron and his sons and all the Israelites and say to them, ‘When an Israelite man or a foreign resident in Israel presents a burnt offering to Jehovah to fulfill his vows or to make a voluntary offering, 19 he should present a sound male from the herd, the young rams, or the goats, in order to gain approval. 20 You must not present anything with a defect, for it will not serve to gain approval for you.21 “‘If a man presents a communion sacrifice to Jehovah to pay a vow or as a voluntary offering, it should be a sound animal from the herd or the flock, in order to gain approval. No defect at all should be in it. 22 No offering should be blind, have a fracture, a cut, a wart, scabbiness, or ringworm; you must not present any of these to Jehovah or make such an offering on the altar for Jehovah. 23 You may present a bull or a sheep with a limb that is too long or too short as a voluntary offering, but it will not be accepted with approval as a vow offering. 24 You must not present to Jehovah one having the testicles damaged or crushed or pulled off or cut off, and you should not offer such animals in your land. 25 And you must not present any of these from the hand of a foreigner as the bread of your God, for they are corrupted and defective. They will not be accepted with approval for you.’”26 Jehovah spoke further to Moses, saying: 27 “When a bull or a young ram or a goat is born, it will continue with its mother for seven days, but from the eighth day forward it will be accepted with approval as an offering, an offering made by fire to Jehovah. 28 As for a bull or a sheep, you must not slaughter it and its young on the same day.29 “If you sacrifice a thanksgiving sacrifice to Jehovah, you should sacrifice it to gain approval for yourselves. 30 It should be eaten on that day. You must not leave any of it until morning. I am Jehovah.31 “You must keep my commandments and carry them out. I am Jehovah. 32 You must not profane my holy name, and I must be sanctified in the midst of the Israelites. I am Jehovah, who is sanctifying you, 33 the one bringing you out of the land of Egypt to prove myself God to you. I am Jehovah.”
23 Jehovah continued speaking to Moses, saying: 2 “Speak to the Israelites and tell them, ‘The seasonal festivals of Jehovah that you should proclaim are holy conventions. These are my seasonal festivals:3 “‘Six days work may be done, but on the seventh day is a sabbath of complete rest, a holy convention. You may not do any sort of work. It is to be a sabbath to Jehovah wherever you dwell.4 “‘These are the seasonal festivals of Jehovah, holy conventions that you should proclaim at the times appointed for them: 5 In the first month, on the 14th day of the month, at twilight is the Passover to Jehovah.6 “‘On the 15th day of this month is the Festival of Unleavened Bread to Jehovah. Seven days you should eat unleavened bread. 7 On the first day, you will observe a holy convention. You should not do any hard work. 8 But you are to present an offering made by fire to Jehovah for seven days. There will be a holy convention on the seventh day. You should not do any hard work.’”9 Jehovah continued to speak to Moses, saying: 10 “Speak to the Israelites and tell them, ‘When you eventually come into the land that I am giving you and you have reaped its harvest, you must bring a sheaf of the firstfruits of your harvest to the priest. 11 And he will wave the sheaf back and forth before Jehovah to gain approval for you. The priest should wave it on the day after the Sabbath. 12 On the day you have the sheaf waved, you must offer a sound young ram in its first year, as a burnt offering to Jehovah. 13 Its grain offering will be two tenths of an eʹphah of fine flour mixed with oil, as an offering made by fire to Jehovah, a pleasing aroma. Its drink offering will be a fourth of a hin of wine. 14 You must not eat any bread, roasted grain, or new grain until this day, until you bring the offering of your God. It is a lasting statute for all your generations wherever you dwell.15 “‘You are to count seven sabbaths from the day after the Sabbath, from the day that you bring the sheaf of the wave offering. They should be complete weeks. 16 You will count off 50 days until the day after the seventh Sabbath, and then you should present a new grain offering to Jehovah. 17 You should bring from your dwelling places two loaves as a wave offering. These should be made of two tenths of an eʹphah of fine flour. They should be baked with leaven, as first ripe fruits to Jehovah. 18 And you should present along with the loaves seven sound male lambs, each a year old, and one young bull and two rams. They will serve as a burnt offering to Jehovah along with the corresponding grain offering and drink offerings, as an offering made by fire, of a pleasing aroma to Jehovah. 19 And you must offer one young goat as a sin offering and two male lambs, each a year old, as a communion sacrifice. 20 The priest will wave them back and forth along with the loaves of the first ripe fruits, as a wave offering before Jehovah, together with the two male lambs. They should serve as something holy to Jehovah for the priest. 21 On this day you will make a proclamation for a holy convention for yourselves. You may not do any hard work. It is a lasting statute in all your dwelling places for all your generations.22 “‘When you reap the harvest of your land, you must not reap the edge of your field completely and you should not pick up what is left from your harvest. You should leave it for the poor and for the foreign resident. I am Jehovah your God.’”23 Jehovah went on speaking to Moses, saying: 24 “Tell the Israelites, ‘In the seventh month, on the first of the month, you should observe a complete rest, a memorial signaled by a trumpet blast, a holy convention. 25 You may not do any hard work, and you will present an offering made by fire to Jehovah.’”26 Jehovah spoke further to Moses, saying: 27 “However, on the tenth of this seventh month is the Day of Atonement. You should observe a holy convention, and you must afflict yourselves and present an offering made by fire to Jehovah. 28 You are not to do any sort of work on this particular day because it is a day of atonement to make atonement for you before Jehovah your God. 29 Anyone who will not afflict himself on this day will be cut off from his people. 30 And I will destroy from among his people every person who does any sort of work on this day. 31 You must not do any sort of work. It is a lasting statute for all your generations wherever you dwell. 32 It is a sabbath of complete rest for you, and you will afflict yourselves on the ninth of the month in the evening. You should observe your sabbath from evening to evening.”33 Jehovah continued speaking to Moses, saying: 34 “Tell the Israelites, ‘On the 15th day of this seventh month is the Festival of Booths for seven days to Jehovah. 35 There is to be a holy convention on the first day, and you should not do any hard work. 36 Seven days you must present an offering made by fire to Jehovah. On the eighth day, you should observe a holy convention, and you should present an offering made by fire to Jehovah. It is a solemn assembly. You may not do any hard work.37 “‘These are the seasonal festivals of Jehovah that you should proclaim as holy conventions for presenting an offering made by fire to Jehovah: the burnt offering and the grain offering of the sacrifice and the drink offerings according to the daily schedule. 38 These are in addition to what is offered on Jehovah’s sabbaths, and your gifts, your vow offerings, and your voluntary offerings, which you should give to Jehovah. 39 However, on the 15th day of the seventh month, when you have gathered the produce of the land, you should celebrate the festival of Jehovah for seven days. On the first day is a complete rest and on the eighth day is a complete rest. 40 On the first day, you will take the fruit of majestic trees, the fronds of palm trees, the branches of leafy trees and poplars of the valley, and you will rejoice before Jehovah your God for seven days. 41 You will celebrate it as a festival to Jehovah for seven days in the year. As a lasting statute during all your generations, you should celebrate it in the seventh month. 42 You should dwell in the booths for seven days. All the natives in Israel should dwell in the booths, 43 so that your future generations may know that it was in the booths that I made the Israelites dwell when I was bringing them out of the land of Egypt. I am Jehovah your God.’”44 So Moses spoke of the seasonal festivals of Jehovah to the Israelites.
24 Jehovah continued to speak to Moses, saying: 2 “Command the Israelites to bring to you pure, beaten olive oil for the lights, to keep the lamps lit constantly. 3 Outside the curtain of the Testimony in the tent of meeting, Aaron should arrange to keep the lamps lit from evening to morning before Jehovah constantly. It is a permanent statute for all your generations. 4 He should set the lamps in order on the lampstand of pure gold before Jehovah constantly.5 “You will take fine flour and bake it into 12 ring-shaped loaves. Two tenths of an eʹphah should go into each loaf. 6 You will place them in two sets of layers, six to the layer set, on the table of pure gold before Jehovah. 7 You should put pure frankincense on each layer set, and it will serve as the bread for a token offering made by fire to Jehovah. 8 On each Sabbath day, he should regularly arrange it before Jehovah. It is a lasting covenant with the Israelites. 9 It will become Aaron’s and his sons’, and they will eat it in a holy place, because it is something most holy for him from Jehovah’s offerings made by fire, as a lasting regulation.”10 Now among the Israelites was a son of an Israelite woman and an Egyptian man, and a fight broke out between him and an Israelite man in the camp. 11 The son of the Israelite woman began to abuse the Name and to curse it. So they brought him to Moses. Incidentally, his mother was She·loʹmith, the daughter of Dibʹri of the tribe of Dan. 12 They placed him in custody until Jehovah’s decision was made clear to them.13 Then Jehovah said to Moses: 14 “Bring the one who cursed to the outside of the camp, and all those who heard him must lay their hands on his head, and then the entire assembly must stone him. 15 And you should tell the Israelites, ‘If any man curses his God, he will answer for his sin. 16 So the abuser of Jehovah’s name should be put to death without fail. The entire assembly should stone him without fail. The foreign resident should be put to death the same as the native for his abusing the Name.17 “‘If a man takes a human life, he should be put to death without fail. 18 Anyone who strikes and kills a domestic animal should make compensation for it, life for life. 19 If a man injures his fellow man, then what he has done should be done to him. 20 Fracture for fracture, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, the same sort of injury he inflicted should be inflicted on him. 21 The man who strikes and kills an animal should make compensation for it, but the one who strikes and kills a man should be put to death.22 “‘One judicial decision will apply for you, whether a foreign resident or a native, because I am Jehovah your God.’”23 Moses then spoke to the Israelites, and they brought the one who uttered the curse to the outside of the camp, and they stoned him. Thus the Israelites did just as Jehovah had commanded Moses.
25 Jehovah spoke further to Moses on Mount Siʹnai, saying: 2 “Speak to the Israelites and tell them, ‘When you eventually come into the land that I am giving you, then the land will observe a sabbath to Jehovah. 3 Six years you should sow your field with seed, and six years you should prune your vineyard, and you will gather the land’s produce. 4 But in the seventh year, there should be a sabbath of complete rest for the land, a sabbath to Jehovah. You should not sow your field with seed or prune your vineyard. 5 You must not reap what grows on its own from the grain left after the harvest, and the grapes of your unpruned vine you must not gather. There should be a year of complete rest for the land. 6 However, you may eat the food that grows in the land during its sabbath; you, your male and female slaves, your hired worker, and the foreign settlers who are residing with you may eat it, 7 as well as the domestic and the wild animals in your land. Everything the land produces may be eaten.8 “‘You will count off seven sabbath years, seven times seven years, and the days of the seven sabbath years will amount to 49 years. 9 You will then sound the horn loudly in the seventh month, on the tenth of the month; on the Day of Atonement, you should cause the sound of the horn to be heard in all your land. 10 You must sanctify the 50th year and proclaim liberty in the land to all its inhabitants. It will become a Jubilee for you, and each of you will return to his property and each of you should return to his family. 11 A Jubilee is what that 50th year will become for you. You will not sow seed or reap what grew on its own from leftover grain nor gather the grapes of unpruned vines. 12 For it is a Jubilee. It is to be holy to you. You may eat only what the land produces by itself.13 “‘In this year of the Jubilee, each of you should return to his property. 14 If you sell anything to your fellow man or if you buy from him, do not exploit one another. 15 You should buy from your fellow man, taking into account the number of the years after the Jubilee, and he should sell to you according to the remaining years for crops. 16 If there are many years remaining, he may increase its purchase price, and when there are few years left, he should reduce its purchase price, because he is selling you the number of crops to be produced. 17 No one among you should exploit his fellow man, and you must be in fear of your God, for I am Jehovah your God. 18 By your carrying out my statutes and keeping my judicial decisions, you will dwell in security in the land. 19 The land will give its fruitage, and you will eat to satisfaction and dwell there in security.20 “‘But if you should say: “What will we eat in the seventh year if we may not sow seed or gather our crops?” 21 I will command my blessing for you in the sixth year, and the land will yield a crop sufficient for three years. 22 Then you will sow seed in the eighth year and eat from the old crop until the ninth year. Until its crop arrives, you will eat from the old.23 “‘The land should not be sold on a permanent basis, because the land is mine. For you are foreign residents and settlers from my standpoint. 24 Throughout the land of your possession, you should grant the right of buying back the land.25 “‘If your brother becomes poor and has to sell some of his property, a repurchaser who is closely related to him must come and buy back what his brother sold. 26 If anyone has no repurchaser but he becomes prosperous and finds the means to repurchase it, 27 he should calculate its value for the years since he sold it and refund the difference to the man whom he sold it to. Then he may return to his property.28 “‘But if he does not find the means to get it back from him, what he sold will remain with the purchaser until the Jubilee year; and it will revert to him in the Jubilee, and he will return to his property.29 “‘Now if a man should sell a home in a walled city, his right of repurchase will also continue until the end of the year from the time of his completing the sale; his right of repurchase will be valid a whole year. 30 But if it is not bought back by the end of one full year, the house within the walled city will become the permanent property of its purchaser throughout his generations. It should not be released in the Jubilee. 31 However, the houses of settlements with no surrounding wall should be considered to be part of the field of the countryside. The right of repurchase should continue for it, and it should be released in the Jubilee.32 “‘As for the houses of the Levites within their cities, the Levites will have the permanent right to repurchase them. 33 When the property of the Levites is not bought back, the house sold in the city belonging to them will also be released in the Jubilee, because the houses of the cities of the Levites are their property among the Israelites. 34 Moreover, the field of pasture ground surrounding their cities may not be sold, for it is their permanent possession.35 “‘If your brother who is nearby becomes poor and cannot support himself, you must sustain him as you would a foreign resident and a settler, so that he may keep alive with you. 36 Do not take interest or make a profit from him. You must be in fear of your God, and your brother will keep alive with you. 37 You must not lend him your money on interest or give out your food for profit. 38 I am Jehovah your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt to give you the land of Caʹnaan, to prove myself your God.39 “‘If your brother who lives nearby becomes poor and he has to sell himself to you, you must not force him to do slave labor. 40 He should be treated like a hired worker, like a settler. He should serve with you until the Jubilee year. 41 Then he will leave you, he and his children with him, and return to his family. He should return to the property of his forefathers. 42 For they are my slaves whom I brought out of the land of Egypt. They should not sell themselves the way a slave is sold. 43 You must not treat him cruelly, and you must be in fear of your God. 44 Your male and female slaves are to come from the nations around you, from them you may buy a male or a female slave. 45 Also from the sons of the foreign settlers who are residing with you, from them and from their families that are born to them in your land you may buy slaves, and they will become your possession. 46 You may pass them on as an inheritance to your sons after you to inherit as a permanent possession. You may use them as workers, but you must not subject your Israelite brothers to cruel treatment.47 “‘But if a foreign resident or a settler among you becomes wealthy and your brother has become poor alongside him and must sell himself to the foreign resident or the settler who lives among you, or to a member of the family of the foreign resident, 48 he will continue to have the right of repurchase after he has sold himself. One of his brothers may buy him back, 49 or his uncle or the son of his uncle may buy him back, or any close relative, one of his family, may buy him back.“‘Or if he himself has become wealthy, he may also buy himself back. 50 He should calculate with his purchaser the time from the year he sold himself to him until the Jubilee year, and the money of his sale will correspond to the number of years. His workdays during that time will be assessed at the rate of a hired worker. 51 If there are many years remaining, he should pay his repurchase price in proportion to the years that are left. 52 But if only a few years remain until the Jubilee year, he should then calculate for himself and pay his repurchase price in proportion to the years remaining. 53 He should continue to serve him year by year as a hired worker; and you should see to it that he does not treat him cruelly. 54 However, if he cannot buy himself back on these terms, he will then go free in the year of Jubilee, he and his children with him.55 “‘For the Israelites are my own slaves. They are my slaves whom I brought out of the land of Egypt. I am Jehovah your God.
26 “‘You must not make worthless gods for yourselves, and you must not set up a carved image or a sacred pillar for yourselves, and you must not put a stone figure in your land in order to bow down toward it; for I am Jehovah your God. 2 You should keep my sabbaths and show reverence for my sanctuary. I am Jehovah.3 “‘If you continue walking in my statutes and keeping my commandments and you carry them out, 4 I will give you showers of rain at their proper time, and the land will yield its produce, and the trees of the field will give their fruit. 5 Your threshing season will extend until your grape harvest, and the grape harvest will extend until the sowing season; and you will eat your bread to satisfaction and dwell in security in your land. 6 I will put peace in the land, and you will lie down with no one making you afraid; and I will rid the land of vicious wild animals, and a sword of war will not pass through your land. 7 You will certainly pursue your enemies, and they will fall before you by the sword. 8 Five of you will pursue 100, and 100 of you will pursue 10,000, and your enemies will fall before you by the sword.9 “‘I will direct my favor to you and make you fruitful and multiply you, and I will keep my covenant with you. 10 While you are still eating the old produce of the preceding year, you will need to clear out the old to make way for the new. 11 And I will place my tabernacle in your midst, and I will not reject you. 12 I will walk among you and be your God, and you for your part will be my people. 13 I am Jehovah your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt to be their slaves no longer, and I broke the bars of your yoke and made you walk with heads held high.14 “‘However, if you will not listen to me or keep all these commandments, 15 and if you reject my statutes, and if you abhor my judicial decisions so that you do not keep all my commandments, and you violate my covenant, 16 I, for my part, will do the following to you: I will punish you with distress, with tuberculosis and burning fever, making your eyes fail and your life waste away. You will sow your seed simply for nothing, for your enemies will eat it. 17 I will set my face against you, and you will be defeated by your enemies; and those who hate you will tread on you, and you will flee when no one is pursuing you.18 “‘If even this does not make you listen to me, I will have to chastise you seven times as much for your sins. 19 I will break your stubborn pride and make your heavens like iron and your earth like copper. 20 You will exhaust your strength for nothing, as your land will not yield its produce, and the trees of the land will not produce fruit.21 “‘But if you keep walking in opposition to me and refuse to listen to me, I will then have to strike you seven times as much, according to your sins. 22 I will send the wild animals of the field among you, and they will bereave you of children and annihilate your domestic animals and reduce your numbers, and your roads will be deserted.23 “‘If in spite of these things you do not accept my correction and you insist on walking in opposition to me, 24 then I too will walk in opposition to you, and I myself will strike you seven times for your sins. 25 I will bring an avenging sword upon you for breaking the covenant. If you gather yourselves into your cities, I will send disease into your midst, and you will be given into the hand of an enemy. 26 When I destroy your supply of bread, ten women will be able to bake your bread in only one oven and then ration your bread by weight; and you will eat but you will not be satisfied.27 “‘If in spite of this you will not listen to me and you insist on walking in opposition to me, 28 I will intensify my opposition to you, and I myself will have to chastise you seven times for your sins. 29 So you will have to eat the flesh of your sons, and you will eat the flesh of your daughters. 30 I will annihilate your sacred high places and cut down your incense stands and pile your carcasses on the carcasses of your disgusting idols, and I will turn away from you in disgust. 31 I will give your cities to the sword and make your sanctuaries desolate, and I will not smell the pleasing aromas of your sacrifices. 32 I myself will make the land desolate, and your enemies who are dwelling in it will stare in amazement over it. 33 And I will scatter you among the nations, and I will unsheathe a sword after you; and your land will be made desolate, and your cities will be devastated.34 “‘At that time the land will pay off its sabbaths all the days it lies desolate, while you are in the land of your enemies. At that time the land will rest, as it must repay its sabbaths. 35 All the days it lies desolate it will rest, because it did not rest during your sabbaths when you were dwelling on it.36 “‘As for those who survive, I will fill their hearts with despair in the lands of their enemies; and the sound of a blowing leaf will cause them to flee, and they will flee like someone running from the sword and fall without anyone pursuing them. 37 They will stumble over one another like those running from a sword, though no one is pursuing them. You will not be able to resist your enemies. 38 You will perish among the nations, and the land of your enemies will consume you. 39 Those of you who remain will be left to rot in the lands of your enemies because of your error. Yes, they will rot away because of the errors of their fathers. 40 Then they will confess their own error and the error and unfaithfulness of their fathers and admit that they behaved unfaithfully by walking in opposition to me. 41 Then I also walked in opposition to them by bringing them into the land of their enemies.“‘Perhaps then their uncircumcised heart will be humbled, and then they will pay off their error. 42 And I will remember my covenant with Jacob, and my covenant with Isaac, and I will remember my covenant with Abraham, and I will remember the land. 43 While the land was abandoned by them, it was paying off its sabbaths and lying desolate without them, and they were paying for their error, because they rejected my judicial decisions and they abhorred my statutes. 44 But despite all of this, while they are in the land of their enemies, I will never completely reject them nor cast them away to the point of exterminating them, which would violate my covenant with them, for I am Jehovah their God. 45 For their sakes I will remember the covenant with their ancestors whom I brought out of the land of Egypt under the eyes of the nations, in order to prove myself their God. I am Jehovah.’”46 These are the regulations, the judicial decisions, and the laws that Jehovah established between himself and the Israelites on Mount Siʹnai through Moses.
27 Jehovah continued to speak to Moses, saying: 2 “Speak to the Israelites and tell them, ‘If a man makes a special vow to offer the estimated value of a person to Jehovah, 3 the estimated value of a male from 20 to 60 years old will be 50 shekels of silver by the standard shekel of the holy place. 4 But if it is a female, the estimated value will be 30 shekels. 5 If the age is from 5 to 20 years old, the estimated value of the male will be 20 shekels and 10 shekels for the female. 6 If the age is from one month up to five years old, the estimated value of the male will be five shekels of silver and three shekels of silver for the female.7 “‘If the age is 60 years and over, the estimated value will be 15 shekels for the male and 10 shekels for the female. 8 But if he is too poor to pay the estimated value, the person will stand before the priest, and the priest will set a value on him. The priest will make the valuation according to what the one making the vow can afford.9 “‘If the vow involves an animal that is suitable for offering to Jehovah, whatever may be given to Jehovah will become something holy. 10 He may not replace it or exchange it with good for bad or with bad for good. But if he should exchange it with one animal for another animal, the original and what is exchanged for it will both become holy. 11 If it is an unclean animal that may not be presented as an offering to Jehovah, he will then stand the animal before the priest. 12 The priest will then set its value, as to whether it is good or bad. The value estimated by the priest will stand. 13 But if he ever wants to buy it back, he must then give a fifth of it in addition to the estimated value.14 “‘Now if a man should sanctify his house as something holy to Jehovah, the priest will then set its value, whether it is good or bad. According to the value that the priest sets, that is what it will cost. 15 But if the one who sanctifies his house wants to buy it back, he must then give a fifth of the money of the estimated value in addition to it, and it will become his.16 “‘If a man sanctifies to Jehovah some of the field that he possesses, the value will be estimated in proportion to the seed needed to sow it: a hoʹmer of barley seed will be 50 shekels of silver. 17 If he sanctifies his field from the year of Jubilee, the estimated value stands. 18 If he sanctifies his field after the Jubilee, the priest will calculate for him the price in proportion to the years that are left until the next year of Jubilee, and a deduction should be made from the estimated value. 19 But if the one who sanctified it should ever buy the field back, he must then give a fifth of the money of the estimated value in addition to it, and it will remain his. 20 Now if he should not buy the field back and the field is sold to another man, it may not be bought back again. 21 When the field is released in the Jubilee, it will become something holy to Jehovah, as a field that is devoted to him. It will become the property of the priests.22 “‘If a man sanctifies to Jehovah a field he purchased that is not part of his hereditary property, 23 the priest will calculate for him the amount of the valuation up until the year of Jubilee, and he will give the estimated value on that day. It is something holy to Jehovah. 24 In the year of Jubilee, the field will return to the one he bought it from, to the one the land belongs to.25 “‘Every value should be estimated by the standard shekel of the holy place. The shekel should amount to 20 geʹrahs.26 “‘However, no one should sanctify the firstborn of the animals, since it is born as the firstborn for Jehovah. Whether bull or sheep, it already belongs to Jehovah. 27 If it is among the unclean animals and he redeems it according to the estimated value, he should give a fifth of it in addition to it. But if it is not bought back, it will be sold according to the estimated value.28 “‘But no devoted thing that a man devotes unconditionally to Jehovah from his belongings may be sold or bought back, whether from mankind or animals or the field he possesses. Every devoted thing is something most holy to Jehovah. 29 Furthermore, no condemned person who is set apart for destruction may be redeemed. He should be put to death without fail.30 “‘Every tenth part of the land, whether from the produce of the field or the fruit of the trees, belongs to Jehovah. It is something holy to Jehovah. 31 If a man ever wants to buy any of his tenth part back, he should give a fifth of it in addition to it. 32 As for every tenth part of the herd and flock, everything that passes under the shepherd’s staff, the tenth animal should become something holy to Jehovah. 33 He should not examine whether it is good or bad, neither should he exchange it. But if he would ever try to exchange it, both the original and what is exchanged for it should become something holy. It may not be bought back.’”34 These are the commandments that Jehovah gave to Moses for the Israelites on Mount Siʹnai.
3 “‘If his offering is a communion sacrifice and if he is presenting it from the herd, whether a male or a female, he should present a sound animal before Jehovah. 2 He is to lay his hand on the head of his offering, and it will be slaughtered at the entrance of the tent of meeting; and Aaron’s sons, the priests, will sprinkle the blood on all sides of the altar. 3 He will present part of the communion sacrifice as an offering made by fire to Jehovah: the fat that covers the intestines, all the fat that surrounds the intestines, 4 and the two kidneys with the fat on them that is near the loins. He will also remove the appendage of the liver along with the kidneys. 5 Aaron’s sons will make it smoke on the altar on top of the burnt offering that is placed on the wood that is over the fire; it is an offering made by fire as a pleasing aroma to Jehovah.6 “‘If his offering is from the flock for a communion sacrifice to Jehovah, he will present a sound male or a female animal. 7 If he is presenting a young ram as his offering, then he will present it before Jehovah. 8 He will lay his hand on the head of his offering, and it will be slaughtered in front of the tent of meeting. Aaron’s sons will sprinkle its blood on all sides of the altar. 9 He will present the fat from the communion sacrifice as an offering made by fire to Jehovah. He will remove the entire fat tail near the backbone, the fat that covers the intestines, all the fat that surrounds the intestines, 10 and the two kidneys with the fat on them that is near the loins. He will also remove the appendage of the liver along with the kidneys. 11 And the priest will make it smoke on the altar as food, an offering made by fire to Jehovah.12 “‘If his offering is a goat, then he will present it before Jehovah. 13 He will lay his hand on its head, and it will be slaughtered before the tent of meeting, and Aaron’s sons must sprinkle its blood on all sides of the altar. 14 The part he will present as his offering made by fire to Jehovah is the fat that covers the intestines, all the fat that surrounds the intestines, 15 and the two kidneys with the fat on them that is near the loins. He will also remove the appendage of the liver along with the kidneys. 16 The priest will make them smoke on the altar as food, an offering made by fire for a pleasing aroma. All the fat belongs to Jehovah.17 “‘It is a lasting statute for your generations, in all your dwelling places: You must not eat any fat or any blood at all.’”
4 Jehovah went on to say to Moses: 2 “Tell the Israelites, ‘If someone sins unintentionally by doing any of the things that Jehovah commanded should not be done:3 “‘If the anointed priest sins and brings guilt on the people, then he must present a sound young bull to Jehovah as a sin offering for the sin he committed. 4 He will bring the bull to the entrance of the tent of meeting before Jehovah and lay his hand on the bull’s head, and he is to slaughter the bull before Jehovah. 5 Then the anointed priest will take some of the bull’s blood and bring it into the tent of meeting; 6 and the priest will dip his finger in the blood and spatter some of the blood seven times before Jehovah in front of the curtain of the holy place. 7 The priest will also put some of the blood on the horns of the altar of perfumed incense, which is before Jehovah in the tent of meeting; and he will pour all the rest of the bull’s blood at the base of the altar of burnt offering, which is at the entrance of the tent of meeting.8 “‘He will then remove all the fat of the bull of the sin offering, including the fat that covers the intestines and the fat that surrounds the intestines, 9 and the two kidneys with the fat on them that is near the loins. And he will remove the appendage of the liver along with the kidneys. 10 It will be the same as what is removed from a bull of the communion sacrifice. And the priest will make them smoke on the altar of burnt offering.11 “‘But as for the skin of the bull and all its flesh along with its head, its shanks, its intestines, and its dung— 12 all the rest of the bull—he will have it taken to the outskirts of the camp to a clean place where the ashes are discarded, and he will burn it on wood in the fire. It should be burned where the ashes are discarded.13 “‘Now if the entire assembly of Israel has become guilty by committing a sin unintentionally, but the congregation was unaware that they had done something that Jehovah commanded them not to do, 14 and then the sin becomes known, the congregation must present a young bull for a sin offering and bring it before the tent of meeting. 15 The elders of the assembly will lay their hands on the bull’s head before Jehovah, and the bull will be slaughtered before Jehovah.16 “‘Then the anointed priest will bring some of the bull’s blood into the tent of meeting. 17 The priest is to dip his finger into the blood and spatter some of it seven times before Jehovah in front of the curtain. 18 He will then put some of the blood on the horns of the altar that is before Jehovah, which is in the tent of meeting; and he will pour all the rest of the blood at the base of the altar of burnt offering, which is at the entrance of the tent of meeting. 19 He will remove all its fat and make it smoke on the altar. 20 He is to do to the bull just as he did to the other bull of the sin offering. That is how he will do it, and the priest will make atonement for them, and they will be forgiven. 21 He will have the bull taken to the outskirts of the camp and will burn it, just as he burned the first bull. It is a sin offering for the congregation.22 “‘When a chieftain unintentionally sins by doing one of all the things that Jehovah his God commands should not be done and has become guilty, 23 or if he becomes aware of a sin that he has committed against the commandment, then he must bring a sound young male goat as his offering. 24 He will lay his hand on the head of the young goat and slaughter it in the place where the burnt offering is slaughtered before Jehovah. It is a sin offering. 25 The priest will take some of the blood of the sin offering with his finger and put it on the horns of the altar of burnt offering, and he will pour the rest of its blood at the base of the altar of burnt offering. 26 He will make all its fat smoke on the altar like the fat of the communion sacrifice; and the priest will make atonement for him for his sin, and it will be forgiven him.27 “‘If any one of the people of the land sins unintentionally and becomes guilty by doing one of the things that Jehovah commands should not be done, 28 or if he becomes aware of a sin that he has committed, then he should bring a sound young female goat as his offering for the sin he has committed. 29 He will lay his hand on the head of the sin offering and slaughter the sin offering in the same place as the burnt offering. 30 The priest will take some of its blood with his finger and put it on the horns of the altar of burnt offering, and he will pour all the rest of its blood at the base of the altar. 31 He will remove all its fat, just as the fat is removed from the communion sacrifice, and the priest will make it smoke on the altar as a pleasing aroma to Jehovah; and the priest will make atonement for him, and it will be forgiven him.32 “‘But if he offers a lamb as his sin offering, he should bring a sound female lamb. 33 He will lay his hand on the head of the sin offering and slaughter it as a sin offering in the place where the burnt offering is slaughtered. 34 The priest will take some of the blood of the sin offering with his finger and put it on the horns of the altar of burnt offering, and he will pour all the rest of its blood at the base of the altar. 35 He will remove all its fat the same way that the fat of the young ram of the communion sacrifice is removed, and the priest will make them smoke on the altar on top of Jehovah’s offerings made by fire; and the priest will make atonement for him for the sin that he has committed, and it will be forgiven him.
5 “‘If someone sins because he has heard a public call to testify and he is a witness or has seen or learned about it and he does not report it, then he will answer for his error.2 “‘Or when a person touches anything unclean, whether the dead body of an unclean wild animal, an unclean domestic animal, or an unclean swarming creature, he is unclean and has become guilty even if he does not realize it. 3 Or in case someone without being aware of it touches human uncleanness—anything unclean that may make him unclean—and he comes to know it, then he becomes guilty.4 “‘Or if someone rashly swears to do something—whether it is to do good or to do evil, no matter what it may be—and he was unaware of it, but then he realizes that he has sworn rashly, he becomes guilty.5 “‘If he becomes guilty as respects one of these things, then he must confess in what way he has sinned. 6 He will also bring his guilt offering to Jehovah for the sin that he committed, namely, a female from the flock, either a female lamb or a young female goat, for a sin offering. Then the priest will make atonement for him for his sin.7 “‘If, though, he cannot afford a sheep, he must bring to Jehovah two turtledoves or two young pigeons as his guilt offering for the sin, one for a sin offering and one for a burnt offering. 8 He is to bring them to the priest, who will present first the one for the sin offering and nip off its head at the front of its neck, without severing it. 9 He will spatter some of the blood of the sin offering on the side of the altar, but the remainder of the blood will be drained out at the base of the altar. It is a sin offering. 10 He will handle the other one as a burnt offering according to the regular procedure; and the priest will make atonement for him for the sin that he has committed, and it will be forgiven him.11 “‘Now if he cannot afford two turtledoves or two young pigeons, he must bring as his offering for his sin a tenth of an eʹphah of fine flour for a sin offering. He should not add oil to it or place frankincense on it, for it is a sin offering. 12 He will bring it to the priest, and the priest will take from it his handful as a token offering and make it smoke on the altar on top of Jehovah’s offerings made by fire. It is a sin offering. 13 The priest will make atonement for him for the sin that he has committed, any one of these sins, and it will be forgiven him. The remainder of the offering will become the priest’s, just like the grain offering.’”14 Jehovah continued to speak to Moses, saying: 15 “If someone behaves unfaithfully by unintentionally sinning against the holy things of Jehovah, he is to bring to Jehovah a sound ram from the flock as a guilt offering; its value in silver shekels is set according to the standard shekel of the holy place. 16 And he will make compensation for the sin he has committed against the holy place and he will also add a fifth of its value. He will give it to the priest, so that the priest may make atonement for him with the ram of the guilt offering, and it will be forgiven him.17 “If someone sins by doing any of the things that Jehovah commands should not be done, even if he is not aware of it, he is still guilty and will answer for his error. 18 He should bring to the priest a sound ram from the flock according to the estimated value, for a guilt offering. Then the priest will make atonement for him for the unintentional mistake that he unknowingly committed, and it will be forgiven him. 19 It is a guilt offering. He has certainly become guilty of sinning against Jehovah.”
6 Jehovah went on to say to Moses: 2 “If someone sins and behaves unfaithfully toward Jehovah by deceiving his neighbor in connection with something entrusted to him, or something deposited with him, or he robs or defrauds his neighbor, 3 or he finds something lost and is deceptive about it, and if he swears falsely over any such sin he may commit, this is what he should do: 4 If he has sinned and is guilty, he must return what he stole, what he extorted, what he took by fraud, what was entrusted to him, or the lost thing that he found, 5 or anything about which he swore falsely, and he must make full compensation for it, and he will add to it a fifth of its value. He will give it to the owner on the day his guilt is proved. 6 And he will bring to the priest as his guilt offering to Jehovah a sound ram from the flock according to the assessed value, for a guilt offering. 7 The priest will make atonement for him before Jehovah, and he will be forgiven for anything he may have done resulting in his guilt.”8 Jehovah continued to speak to Moses, saying: 9 “Command Aaron and his sons and say, ‘This is the law of the burnt offering: The burnt offering will remain on the hearth on the altar all night long until the morning, and the fire will be kept burning on the altar. 10 The priest will clothe himself with his official dress of linen, and he will put the linen shorts on over his flesh. Then he will remove the ashes of the burnt offering that the fire had consumed on the altar and place them beside the altar. 11 Then he will take off his garments and put on other garments and take the ashes to a clean place outside the camp. 12 The fire will be kept burning on the altar. It must not go out. The priest must burn wood on it each morning and arrange the burnt offering over it, and he will make the fat of the communion sacrifices smoke over it. 13 Fire will be kept constantly burning on the altar. It must not go out.14 “‘Now this is the law of the grain offering: You sons of Aaron are to present it before Jehovah in front of the altar. 15 One of them will take a handful from the fine flour of the grain offering and some of its oil and all the frankincense that is on the grain offering, and he will make it smoke on the altar as a pleasing aroma for a token offering to Jehovah. 16 Aaron and his sons will eat what is left of it. It will be eaten as unleavened bread in a holy place. They will eat it in the courtyard of the tent of meeting. 17 It should not be baked with anything leavened. I have given it as their share out of my offerings made by fire. It is something most holy, like the sin offering and like the guilt offering. 18 Every male among the sons of Aaron will eat it. It is their permanent allowance throughout your generations from Jehovah’s offerings made by fire. Everything that touches them will become holy.’”19 Jehovah spoke again to Moses: 20 “This is the offering that Aaron and his sons will present to Jehovah on the day he is anointed: the tenth of an eʹphah of fine flour as a regular grain offering, half of it in the morning and half of it in the evening. 21 It will be made with oil on a griddle. You will bring it well-mixed with oil and present it in pieces as a baked product of the grain offering as a pleasing aroma to Jehovah. 22 The anointed priest who succeeds him from among his sons will make it. It is a lasting regulation: As a whole offering it will be made to smoke to Jehovah. 23 Every grain offering of a priest should be a whole offering. It must not be eaten.”24 Jehovah spoke again to Moses and said: 25 “Tell Aaron and his sons, ‘This is the law of the sin offering: In the place where the burnt offering is slaughtered, the sin offering will also be slaughtered before Jehovah. It is a most holy thing. 26 The priest who offers it for sin will eat it. It will be eaten in a holy place, in the courtyard of the tent of meeting.27 “‘Everything that touches its flesh will become holy, and when anyone spatters some of its blood on his garment, you should wash what was spattered with blood in a holy place. 28 The earthenware vessel in which it was boiled is to be shattered. But if it was boiled in a copper vessel, then the vessel must be scoured and washed with water.29 “‘Every male among the priests will eat it. It is something most holy. 30 However, no sin offering is to be eaten if some of its blood is brought into the tent of meeting to make atonement in the holy place. It is to be burned with fire.
7 “‘This is the law of the guilt offering: It is something most holy. 2 They will slaughter the guilt offering in the place where they slaughter the burnt offerings, and its blood should be sprinkled on all sides of the altar. 3 He will present all its fat, including the fat tail, the fat that covers the intestines, 4 and the two kidneys with their fat that is near the loins. He will also remove the appendage of the liver along with the kidneys. 5 The priest will make them smoke on the altar as an offering made by fire to Jehovah. It is a guilt offering. 6 Every male among the priests will eat it, and it should be eaten in a holy place. It is something most holy. 7 The law regarding the sin offering applies to the guilt offering; it belongs to the priest who makes atonement with it.8 “‘When the priest presents the burnt offering for someone, the skin of the burnt offering that was presented to the priest will become his.9 “‘Every grain offering that is baked in the oven or prepared in the pan or on the griddle belongs to the priest who presents it. It will become his. 10 But every grain offering that is mixed with oil or that is dry will be for all of Aaron’s sons; each will have an equal share.11 “‘Now this is the law of the communion sacrifice that one may present to Jehovah: 12 If he presents it as an expression of thanksgiving, he will present along with the thanksgiving sacrifice unleavened ring-shaped loaves mixed with oil, unleavened wafers spread with oil, and ring-shaped loaves made with fine flour, well-mixed and blended with oil. 13 He will present his offering along with ring-shaped loaves of leavened bread and the thanksgiving sacrifice of his communion sacrifices. 14 He is to present from it one of each offering as a sacred portion to Jehovah; it will belong to the priest who sprinkles the blood of the communion sacrifices. 15 The flesh of the thanksgiving sacrifice of his communion sacrifices is to be eaten on the day he offers it. He must not save any of it until morning.16 “‘If the sacrifice of his offering is a vow or a voluntary offering, it is to be eaten on the day he presents his sacrifice, and what is left of it may also be eaten on the next day. 17 But whatever is left of the flesh of the sacrifice on the third day is to be burned with fire. 18 However, if any of the flesh of his communion sacrifice is eaten on the third day, the one presenting it will not be accepted with approval. It will not be credited to him; it is an offensive thing, and the person who eats some of it will answer for his error. 19 Flesh that touches anything unclean is not to be eaten. It is to be burned with fire. Everyone who is clean may eat the clean flesh.20 “‘But any person who is unclean and eats the flesh of the communion sacrifice, which is for Jehovah, that person must be cut off from his people. 21 If someone touches anything unclean, whether the uncleanness of a man or an unclean animal or any unclean disgusting thing, and eats some of the flesh of the communion sacrifice, which is for Jehovah, that person must be cut off from his people.’”22 Jehovah continued to speak to Moses, saying: 23 “Tell the Israelites, ‘You must not eat any fat of a bull or a young ram or a goat. 24 The fat of an animal found dead and the fat of an animal killed by another animal may be used for any other purpose, but you must never eat it. 25 For whoever eats fat from an animal that he presents as an offering made by fire to Jehovah must be cut off from his people.26 “‘You must not eat any blood in any of your dwelling places, whether that of birds or that of animals. 27 Anyone who eats any blood must be cut off from his people.’”28 Jehovah went on to speak to Moses, saying: 29 “Tell the Israelites, ‘Whoever presents his communion sacrifice to Jehovah will bring part of the offering from his communion sacrifice to Jehovah. 30 He will bring in his own hands the fat along with the breast as an offering made by fire to Jehovah, and he will wave it back and forth as a wave offering before Jehovah. 31 The priest will make the fat smoke on the altar, but the breast will belong to Aaron and his sons.32 “‘You will give the right leg as a sacred portion to the priest from your communion sacrifices. 33 The son of Aaron who presents the blood of the communion sacrifices and the fat will have the right leg as his portion. 34 For I take the breast of the wave offering and the leg of the sacred portion from the communion sacrifices of the Israelites, and I give them to Aaron the priest and his sons as a lasting regulation for the Israelites.35 “‘This was the portion from Jehovah’s offerings made by fire to be set aside for the priests, for Aaron and his sons, on the day he presented them to serve as priests to Jehovah. 36 Jehovah commanded to give them this portion from the Israelites on the day he anointed them. It is a permanent statute for their generations.’”37 This is the law concerning the burnt offering, the grain offering, the sin offering, the guilt offering, the installation sacrifice, and the communion sacrifice, 38 just as Jehovah commanded Moses on Mount Siʹnai in the day he commanded the Israelites to present their offerings to Jehovah in the wilderness of Siʹnai.
8 Jehovah continued to speak to Moses, saying: 2 “Take Aaron and his sons with him, the garments, the anointing oil, the bull of the sin offering, the two rams, and the basket of unleavened bread, 3 and make all the assembly gather together at the entrance of the tent of meeting.”4 Then Moses did just as Jehovah had commanded him, and the assembly gathered together at the entrance of the tent of meeting. 5 Moses now said to the assembly: “This is what Jehovah has commanded us to do.” 6 So Moses brought Aaron and his sons near and washed them with water. 7 After that he put the robe on him, wrapped him with the sash, clothed him with the sleeveless coat, and put the ephʹod on him and tied it with the woven belt of the ephʹod, binding it securely on him. 8 Next he placed the breastpiece on him and put the Uʹrim and the Thumʹmim in the breastpiece. 9 Then he placed the turban on his head, and he put on the front of the turban the shining plate of gold, the holy sign of dedication, just as Jehovah had commanded Moses.10 Moses then took the anointing oil and anointed the tabernacle and all that was in it and sanctified them. 11 After that he spattered some of it seven times on the altar and anointed the altar and all its utensils and the basin and its stand in order to sanctify them. 12 Finally he poured some of the anointing oil on Aaron’s head and anointed him in order to sanctify him.13 Moses then brought Aaron’s sons near and clothed them with robes and wrapped them with sashes and put headgear on them, just as Jehovah had commanded Moses.14 Then he brought the bull of the sin offering, and Aaron and his sons laid their hands on the head of the bull of the sin offering. 15 Moses slaughtered it and took the blood with his finger and put it on the horns of the altar on all sides, and he purified the altar from sin, but the rest of the blood he poured at the base of the altar, in order to sanctify it to make atonement on it. 16 After that he took all the fat that was on the intestines, the appendage of the liver, and the two kidneys and their fat, and Moses made them smoke on the altar. 17 Then he had the rest of the bull, its skin, its flesh, and its dung, burned with fire outside the camp, just as Jehovah had commanded Moses.18 He now brought the ram of the burnt offering near, and Aaron and his sons laid their hands on the head of the ram. 19 Moses then slaughtered it and sprinkled the blood on all sides of the altar. 20 He cut the ram into its pieces, and Moses made the head, the pieces, and the suet smoke. 21 He washed the intestines and the shanks with water, and Moses made the entire ram smoke on the altar. It was a burnt offering as a pleasing aroma. It was an offering made by fire to Jehovah, just as Jehovah had commanded Moses.22 Then he brought the second ram, the ram of the installation, and Aaron and his sons laid their hands on the ram’s head. 23 Moses slaughtered it and took some of its blood and put it on Aaron’s right earlobe and on the thumb of his right hand and on the big toe of his right foot. 24 Next Moses brought Aaron’s sons forward and put some of the blood on their right earlobe and on the thumb of their right hand and on the big toe of their right foot; but Moses sprinkled the rest of the blood on all sides of the altar.25 Then he took the fat, the fat tail, all the fat that was on the intestines, the appendage of the liver, the two kidneys and their fat, and the right leg. 26 He took out of the basket of unleavened bread that was before Jehovah one unleavened ring-shaped loaf, one ring-shaped loaf of oiled bread, and one wafer. He then placed them on the pieces of fat and the right leg. 27 After that he put all of them on the palms of Aaron and the palms of his sons and began to wave them back and forth as a wave offering before Jehovah. 28 Then Moses took them from their hands and made them smoke on the altar on top of the burnt offering. They were an installation sacrifice as a pleasing aroma. It was an offering made by fire to Jehovah.29 Moses then took the breast and waved it back and forth as a wave offering before Jehovah. From the installation ram it became the portion for Moses, just as Jehovah had commanded Moses.30 And Moses took some of the anointing oil and some of the blood that was on the altar and spattered it on Aaron and his garments and on his sons and the garments of his sons who were with him. Thus he sanctified Aaron and his garments and his sons and their garments.31 Then Moses said to Aaron and his sons: “Boil the flesh at the entrance of the tent of meeting, and you will eat it there with the bread that is in the installation basket, just as I was commanded, ‘Aaron and his sons will eat it.’ 32 What is left over of the flesh and the bread you will burn with fire. 33 You must not go out from the entrance of the tent of meeting for seven days, until the days for completing your installation are over, because it will take seven days to install you as priests. 34 Jehovah commanded that we do what we have done today in order to make atonement for you. 35 You will stay at the entrance of the tent of meeting day and night for seven days and carry out your obligation to Jehovah, so that you may not die; for so I have been commanded.”36 And Aaron and his sons did all the things that Jehovah had commanded by means of Moses.
9 On the eighth day, Moses called Aaron and his sons and the elders of Israel. 2 He said to Aaron: “Take for yourself a young calf for a sin offering and a ram for a burnt offering, sound ones, and present them before Jehovah. 3 But you will say to the Israelites, ‘Take a male goat for a sin offering and a calf and a young ram, each a year old, sound ones, for a burnt offering, 4 and a bull and a ram for communion sacrifices, to sacrifice them before Jehovah, and a grain offering mixed with oil, for today Jehovah will appear to you.’”5 So they took what Moses had commanded before the tent of meeting. Then the whole assembly came forward and stood before Jehovah. 6 And Moses said: “This is what Jehovah has commanded you to do, so that the glory of Jehovah may appear to you.” 7 Then Moses said to Aaron: “Approach the altar and present your sin offering and your burnt offering, and make atonement in your own behalf and in behalf of your house; and present the offering of the people, and make atonement in their behalf, just as Jehovah has commanded.”8 Aaron immediately approached the altar and slaughtered the calf of the sin offering that was for him. 9 Then Aaron’s sons presented the blood to him, and he dipped his finger in the blood and put it on the horns of the altar, and he poured the rest of the blood at the base of the altar. 10 He made the fat and the kidneys and the appendage of the liver from the sin offering smoke on the altar, just as Jehovah had commanded Moses. 11 And he burned the flesh and the skin with fire outside the camp.12 Then he slaughtered the burnt offering, and Aaron’s sons handed him the blood, and he sprinkled it on all sides of the altar. 13 They handed him the pieces of the burnt offering along with the head, and he made them smoke on the altar. 14 Further, he washed the intestines and the shanks and made them smoke on the burnt offering on the altar.15 He then presented the offering of the people and took the goat of the sin offering that was for the people and slaughtered it and made a sin offering with it like the first one. 16 And he presented the burnt offering and handled it according to the regular procedure.17 He next presented the grain offering, filling his hand with some of it and making it smoke on the altar, in addition to the burnt offering of the morning.18 After that he slaughtered the bull and the ram of the communion sacrifice that was for the people. Then Aaron’s sons handed him the blood, and he sprinkled it around on all sides of the altar. 19 As for the pieces of fat of the bull, the fat tail of the ram, the fat covering the internal organs, the kidneys, and the appendage of the liver, 20 they placed all those pieces of fat on the breasts, after which he made the pieces of fat smoke on the altar. 21 But the breasts and the right leg Aaron waved back and forth as a wave offering before Jehovah, just as Moses had commanded.22 Then Aaron raised his hands toward the people and blessed them and came down from making the sin offering and the burnt offering and the communion sacrifices. 23 Finally Moses and Aaron went into the tent of meeting and came out and blessed the people.Jehovah’s glory now appeared to all the people, 24 and fire came out from Jehovah and began consuming the burnt offering and the pieces of fat on the altar. When all the people saw it, they started shouting and they fell with their faces to the ground.
1 And Jehovah called Moses and spoke to him from the tent of meeting, saying: 2 “Speak to the Israelites and tell them, ‘If any one of you would present an offering to Jehovah from the domestic animals, you should present your offering from the herd or from the flock.3 “‘If his offering is a burnt offering from the herd, he should present a sound male animal. He should present it of his own free will before Jehovah at the entrance of the tent of meeting. 4 He is to lay his hand on the head of the burnt offering, and it will be accepted in his behalf to make atonement for him.5 “‘Then the young bull must be slaughtered before Jehovah, and the sons of Aaron, the priests, will present the blood and sprinkle the blood on all sides of the altar, which is at the entrance of the tent of meeting. 6 The burnt offering should be skinned and cut into pieces. 7 The sons of Aaron, the priests, are to put fire on the altar and arrange wood on the fire. 8 The sons of Aaron, the priests, will arrange the pieces of the offering with the head and the suet over the wood that is on the fire on the altar. 9 Its intestines and its shanks will be washed with water, and the priest is to make all of it smoke on the altar as a burnt offering, an offering made by fire of a pleasing aroma to Jehovah.10 “‘If his offering for a burnt offering is from the flock, from the young rams or the goats, he should present a sound male. 11 It is to be slaughtered at the north side of the altar before Jehovah, and the sons of Aaron, the priests, will sprinkle its blood on all sides of the altar. 12 He will cut it up into pieces, and with its head and its suet, the priest will arrange them over the wood on the fire on the altar. 13 He will wash the intestines and the shanks with water, and the priest will present all of it and make it smoke on the altar. It is a burnt offering, an offering made by fire of a pleasing aroma to Jehovah.14 “‘However, if he offers birds as a burnt offering to Jehovah, he will present his offering from the turtledoves or the young pigeons. 15 The priest will present it at the altar and nip off its head and make it smoke on the altar, but its blood should be drained out on the side of the altar. 16 He should remove its crop and its feathers and throw them beside the altar, to the east, to the place for the ashes. 17 He will split it at its wings without dividing it into two parts. Then the priest will make it smoke on the altar over the wood that is on the fire. It is a burnt offering, an offering made by fire of a pleasing aroma to Jehovah.
10 Jehovah then said to Moses: 2 “Make two trumpets for yourself; make them of hammered silver, and use them to summon the assembly and to break up the camps. 3 When both of them are blown, the whole assembly must be summoned to you at the entrance of the tent of meeting. 4 If just one is blown, only the chieftains, the heads of the thousands of Israel, will be summoned to you.5 “When you sound a fluctuating trumpet blast, the camps of those to the east should depart. 6 When you sound a fluctuating trumpet blast a second time, the camps of those to the south should depart. They should sound the trumpet blasts in this way each time one of them departs.7 “Now when calling the congregation together, you should blow the trumpets, but not with fluctuating blasts. 8 Aaron’s sons, the priests, should blow the trumpets, and the use of them will serve as a lasting statute for you throughout your generations.9 “If you should go to war in your land against an oppressor who is harassing you, you should sound a war call on the trumpets, and you will be remembered by Jehovah your God and be saved from your enemies.10 “Also, on your joyous occasions—your festivals and at the beginning of your months—you are to sound the trumpets over your burnt offerings and your communion sacrifices; they will serve as a reminder for you before your God. I am Jehovah your God.”11 Now in the second year, in the second month, on the 20th day of the month, the cloud lifted from over the tabernacle of the Testimony. 12 So the Israelites began to pull away from the wilderness of Siʹnai in the order established for their departure, and the cloud settled in the wilderness of Paʹran. 13 This was the first time they departed following the order of Jehovah through Moses.14 So the three-tribe division of the camp of the sons of Judah departed first by their companies, and Nahʹshon the son of Am·minʹa·dab was over its company. 15 Over the company of the tribe of the sons of Isʹsa·char was Ne·thanʹel the son of Zuʹar. 16 Over the company of the tribe of the sons of Zebʹu·lun was E·liʹab the son of Heʹlon.17 When the tabernacle was taken down, the sons of Gerʹshon and the sons of Me·rarʹi, who carried the tabernacle, departed.18 Then the three-tribe division of the camp of Reuʹben departed by their companies, and E·liʹzur the son of Shedʹe·ur was over its company. 19 Over the company of the tribe of the sons of Simʹe·on was She·luʹmi·el the son of Zu·ri·shadʹdai. 20 Over the company of the tribe of the sons of Gad was E·liʹa·saph the son of Deuʹel.21 Then the Koʹhath·ites, who carried the sanctuary items, departed. The tabernacle was to be set up by the time they arrived.22 Then the three-tribe division of the camp of the sons of Eʹphra·im departed by their companies, and E·lishʹa·ma the son of Am·miʹhud was over its company. 23 Over the company of the tribe of the sons of Ma·nasʹseh was Ga·maʹli·el the son of Pe·dahʹzur. 24 Over the company of the tribe of the sons of Benjamin was Abʹi·dan the son of Gid·e·oʹni.25 Then the three-tribe division of the camp of the sons of Dan departed by their companies, forming the rear guard for all the camps, and A·hi·eʹzer the son of Am·mi·shadʹdai was over its company. 26 Over the company of the tribe of the sons of Ashʹer was Paʹgi·el the son of Ochʹran. 27 Over the company of the tribe of the sons of Naphʹta·li was A·hiʹra the son of Eʹnan. 28 This was the order of departure that the Israelites and their companies followed when they would depart.29 Then Moses said to Hoʹbab the son of Reuʹel the Midʹi·an·ite, the father-in-law of Moses: “We are setting out for the place about which Jehovah said, ‘I will give it to you.’ Do come with us, and we will treat you well, because Jehovah has promised good things for Israel.” 30 But he said to him: “I will not go. I will return to my own country and to my relatives.” 31 At this he said: “Please do not leave us, for you know where we should camp in the wilderness, and you can serve as our guide. 32 And if you do come with us, whatever goodness Jehovah shows to us, we will surely show to you.”33 So they began marching from the mountain of Jehovah for a journey of three days, and the ark of Jehovah’s covenant traveled before them for the three-day journey to search out a resting-place for them. 34 And Jehovah’s cloud was over them by day when they set out from the encampment.35 Whenever the Ark was moved, Moses would say: “Rise up, O Jehovah, and let your enemies be scattered, and let those who hate you flee from before you.” 36 And when it would rest, he would say: “Do return, O Jehovah, to the countless thousands of Israel.”
11 Now the people began to complain bitterly before Jehovah. When Jehovah heard it, his anger flared, and a fire from Jehovah began to blaze against them and to consume some on the outskirts of the camp. 2 When the people began to cry out to Moses, he made supplication to Jehovah, and the fire died out. 3 So that place was given the name Tabʹe·rah, because a fire from Jehovah had blazed against them.4 The mixed crowd who were in their midst then expressed selfish longing, and the Israelites too began to weep again and say: “Who will give us meat to eat? 5 How fondly we remember the fish that we used to eat without cost in Egypt, also the cucumbers, the watermelons, the leeks, the onions, and the garlic! 6 But now we are withering away. We see nothing at all except this manna.”7 Incidentally, the manna was like coriander seed, and it looked like bdellium gum. 8 The people would spread out and pick it up and grind it in hand mills or pound it in a mortar. Then they would boil it in cooking pots or make it into round loaves, and it tasted like an oiled sweet cake. 9 When the dew descended on the camp by night, the manna would also descend on it.10 Moses heard the people weeping, family after family, each man at the entrance of his tent. And Jehovah became very angry, and Moses was also very displeased. 11 Then Moses said to Jehovah: “Why have you afflicted your servant? Why have I not found favor in your eyes, so that you put the burden of all this people on me? 12 Did I conceive all this people? Did I give birth to them, so that you should tell me, ‘Carry them in your bosom, just as an attendant carries the nursing child,’ to the land that you swore to give to their forefathers? 13 From where will I get meat to give to all this people? For they keep weeping before me, saying, ‘Give us meat to eat!’ 14 I am not able to bear all this people by myself; it is too much for me. 15 If this is how you are going to treat me, please kill me right now. If I have found favor in your eyes, do not make me see any more calamity.”16 Jehovah replied to Moses: “Gather for me 70 men from the elders of Israel, men whom you recognize as elders and officials of the people, and take them to the tent of meeting, and have them stand there with you. 17 I will come down and speak with you there, and I will take away some of the spirit that is on you and place it on them, and they will help you in bearing the burden of the people so that you may not have to bear it alone. 18 You should say to the people, ‘Sanctify yourselves for tomorrow, for you will certainly eat meat, because you have wept in Jehovah’s hearing and have said: “Who will give us meat to eat? It was better for us in Egypt.” Jehovah will certainly give you meat, and you will eat. 19 You will eat, not one day nor 2 days nor 5 days nor 10 days nor 20 days, 20 but for a whole month of days, until it comes out of your nostrils and it has become loathsome to you, for you rejected Jehovah, who is in your midst, and you were weeping before him, saying: “Why is it that we have come out of Egypt?”’”21 Then Moses said: “The people I am among number 600,000 men on foot, and yet you yourself have said, ‘Meat I will give them, and they will eat enough for a whole month of days’! 22 If whole flocks and herds were slaughtered, would it be enough for them? Or if all the fish of the sea were caught, would it be enough for them?”23 Jehovah then said to Moses: “Is the hand of Jehovah too short? Now you will see whether what I say will happen to you or not.”24 So Moses went out and spoke the words of Jehovah to the people. And he gathered 70 men from the elders of the people and had them stand around the tent. 25 Then Jehovah came down in a cloud and spoke to him and took away some of the spirit that was on him and put it on each of the 70 elders. And as soon as the spirit settled down on them, they began to behave as prophets, but they did not do it again.26 There were two of the men still in the camp. Their names were Elʹdad and Meʹdad. And the spirit began to settle down on them, as they were among those whose names had been written down, but they had not gone out to the tent. So they began to behave as prophets in the camp. 27 And a young man ran and reported to Moses: “Elʹdad and Meʹdad are behaving as prophets in the camp!” 28 Then Joshua the son of Nun, the minister of Moses from his youth, responded and said: “My lord Moses, restrain them!” 29 But Moses said to him: “Are you jealous for me? No, I wish that all of Jehovah’s people were prophets and that Jehovah would put his spirit on them!” 30 Later Moses returned to the camp along with the elders of Israel.31 Then a wind from Jehovah sprang up and began driving quail from the sea and causing them to fall around the camp, about a day’s journey on this side and a day’s journey on the other side, all around the camp, and they were about two cubits deep on the ground. 32 So all that day and all night and all the next day, the people stayed up and gathered the quail. No one gathered less than ten hoʹmers, and they kept spreading them all around the camp for themselves. 33 But while the meat was still between their teeth, before it could be chewed, Jehovah’s anger blazed against the people, and Jehovah began striking the people with a very great slaughter.34 So they gave that place the name Kibʹroth-hat·taʹa·vah, because there they buried the people who showed selfish craving. 35 From Kibʹroth-hat·taʹa·vah the people departed for Ha·zeʹroth, and they remained at Ha·zeʹroth.
12 Now Mirʹi·am and Aaron began to speak against Moses because of the Cushʹite wife he had married, for he had taken a Cushʹite wife. 2 They were saying: “Is it only by Moses that Jehovah has spoken? Has he not also spoken through us?” And Jehovah was listening. 3 Now the man Moses was by far the meekest of all the men on the face of the earth.4 Jehovah suddenly said to Moses and Aaron and Mirʹi·am: “Go out, the three of you, to the tent of meeting.” So the three of them went out. 5 And Jehovah came down in the pillar of cloud and stood at the entrance of the tent and called Aaron and Mirʹi·am. Both of them went forward. 6 He then said: “Hear my words, please. If there was a prophet of Jehovah among you, I would make myself known to him in a vision, and I would speak to him in a dream. 7 But it is not that way with my servant Moses! He is being entrusted with all my house. 8 Face-to-face I speak to him, openly, not by riddles; and the appearance of Jehovah is what he sees. Why, then, did you not fear to speak against my servant, against Moses?”9 So Jehovah’s anger burned against them, and he departed from them. 10 The cloud moved away from over the tent, and look! Mirʹi·am was struck with leprosy as white as snow. Then Aaron turned toward Mirʹi·am, and he saw that she was struck with leprosy. 11 Immediately Aaron said to Moses: “I beg you, my lord! Please do not hold this sin against us! We have acted foolishly in what we have done. 12 Please, do not let her continue like someone dead, whose flesh is half eaten away at birth!” 13 And Moses began to cry out to Jehovah, saying: “O God, please heal her! Please!”14 Jehovah replied to Moses: “If her father would spit directly in her face, would she not be humiliated for seven days? Let her be quarantined for seven days outside the camp, and afterward she may be brought back in.” 15 So Mirʹi·am was quarantined outside the camp for seven days, and the people did not break camp until Mirʹi·am was brought back in. 16 Then the people departed from Ha·zeʹroth and began camping in the wilderness of Paʹran.
13 Jehovah now spoke to Moses, saying: 2 “Send out men to spy out the land of Caʹnaan, which I am giving to the Israelites. You are to send out one man from each ancestral tribe, each one a chieftain among them.”3 So Moses sent them out from the wilderness of Paʹran at the order of Jehovah. All the men were heads of the Israelites. 4 These are their names: of the tribe of Reuʹben, Sham·muʹa the son of Zacʹcur; 5 of the tribe of Simʹe·on, Shaʹphat the son of Hoʹri; 6 of the tribe of Judah, Caʹleb the son of Je·phunʹneh; 7 of the tribe of Isʹsa·char, Iʹgal the son of Joseph; 8 of the tribe of Eʹphra·im, Ho·sheʹa the son of Nun; 9 of the tribe of Benjamin, Palʹti the son of Raʹphu; 10 of the tribe of Zebʹu·lun, Gadʹdi·el the son of Soʹdi; 11 of the tribe of Joseph, for the tribe of Ma·nasʹseh, Gadʹdi the son of Suʹsi; 12 of the tribe of Dan, Amʹmi·el the son of Ge·malʹli; 13 of the tribe of Ashʹer, Seʹthur the son of Miʹcha·el; 14 of the tribe of Naphʹta·li, Nahʹbi the son of Vophʹsi; 15 of the tribe of Gad, Geuʹel the son of Maʹchi. 16 These are the names of the men whom Moses sent to spy out the land. And Moses gave the name Joshua to Ho·sheʹa the son of Nun.17 When Moses was sending them to spy out the land of Caʹnaan, he said to them: “Go up there into the Negʹeb, and then go up into the mountainous region. 18 You must see what kind of land it is and whether the people who are dwelling in it are strong or weak, few or many, 19 and whether the land is good or bad and whether the cities they are dwelling in are encampments or fortifications. 20 And find out whether the land is rich or poor and whether there are trees in it or not. You must be courageous and take some of the fruitage of the land.” Now it was the season of the first ripe grapes.21 So they went up and spied out the land from the wilderness of Zin to Reʹhob to Leʹbo-haʹmath. 22 When they went up into the Negʹeb, they came to Hebʹron, where A·hiʹman, Sheʹshai, and Talʹmai, the Anʹa·kim, were living. Incidentally, Hebʹron had been built seven years before Zoʹan of Egypt. 23 When they came to the Valley of Eshʹcol, there they cut down a branch with one cluster of grapes, which two of the men had to carry on a bar, as well as some of the pomegranates and figs. 24 They called that place the Valley of Eshʹcol because of the cluster that the Israelites cut down from there.25 At the end of 40 days, they returned from spying out the land. 26 So they came back to Moses and Aaron and all the assembly of the Israelites in the wilderness of Paʹran, at Kaʹdesh. They brought back a report to all the assembly and showed them the fruitage of the land. 27 This is what they reported to Moses: “We entered the land into which you sent us, and it is indeed flowing with milk and honey, and this is its fruitage. 28 Nevertheless, the people who dwell in the land are strong, and the fortified cities are very great. We also saw the Anʹa·kim there. 29 The A·malʹek·ites are dwelling in the land of the Negʹeb, and the Hitʹtites, the Jebʹu·sites, and the Amʹor·ites are dwelling in the mountainous region, and the Caʹnaan·ites are dwelling by the sea and along the Jordan.”30 Then Caʹleb tried to calm the people as they stood before Moses by saying: “Let us go up immediately, and we are sure to take possession of it, because we can surely conquer it.” 31 But the men who went up with him said: “We are not able to go up against the people, because they are stronger than we are.” 32 And they kept on giving the Israelites a bad report about the land that they had spied out, saying: “The land that we passed through to spy out is a land that devours its inhabitants, and all the people whom we saw in it are men of extraordinary size. 33 And there we saw the Nephʹi·lim, the sons of Aʹnak, who are from the Nephʹi·lim, and in comparison we seemed like grasshoppers, both to us and to them.”
14 Then all the assembly raised their voice, and the people continued crying out and weeping all through that night. 2 All the Israelites began to murmur against Moses and Aaron, and the whole assembly spoke against them, saying: “If only we had died in the land of Egypt, or if only we had died in this wilderness! 3 Why is Jehovah bringing us to this land to fall by the sword? Our wives and children will become plunder. Is it not better for us to return to Egypt?” 4 They were even saying to one another: “Let us appoint a leader and return to Egypt!”5 At this Moses and Aaron fell with their faces to the ground before the whole assembled congregation of the Israelites. 6 Joshua the son of Nun and Caʹleb the son of Je·phunʹneh, who were among those who spied out the land, ripped their garments apart, 7 and they said this to all the assembly of the Israelites: “The land that we passed through to spy out is a very, very good land. 8 If Jehovah is pleased with us, he will certainly bring us into this land and give it to us, a land that is flowing with milk and honey. 9 But you must not rebel against Jehovah, and you must not fear the people of the land, for we will devour them. Their protection has been removed from them, and Jehovah is with us. Do not fear them.”10 However, all the assembly talked of stoning them. But Jehovah’s glory appeared on the tent of meeting to all the people of Israel.11 Then Jehovah said to Moses: “How much longer will this people treat me without respect, and how much longer will they not put faith in me in spite of all the signs that I performed among them? 12 Let me strike them with pestilence and drive them away, and let me make you into a nation greater and mightier than they are.”13 But Moses said to Jehovah: “Then the Egyptians, from whose midst you brought this people out by your power, will hear, 14 and they will speak about it to the inhabitants of this land. These also have heard that you, Jehovah, are among this people and have appeared to them face-to-face. You are Jehovah, and your cloud is standing over them, and you are going before them in the pillar of cloud by day and in the pillar of fire by night. 15 If you put this people to death all at once, the nations who have heard of your fame would say this: 16 ‘Jehovah was not able to bring this people into the land he swore to give them, so he slaughtered them in the wilderness.’ 17 Please, now, Jehovah, let your power be great, as you promised when you said: 18 ‘Jehovah, slow to anger and abundant in loyal love, pardoning error and transgression, but he will by no means leave the guilty unpunished, bringing punishment for the error of fathers upon sons, upon the third generation and upon the fourth generation.’ 19 Forgive, please, the error of this people according to your great loyal love, just as you have pardoned this people from Egypt until now.”20 Then Jehovah said: “I forgive them according to your word. 21 But on the other hand, as surely as I live, all the earth will be filled with the glory of Jehovah. 22 However, not one of the men who have seen my glory and my signs that I performed in Egypt and in the wilderness and yet have kept testing me these ten times and have not listened to my voice 23 will ever see the land about which I swore to their fathers. No, not one of those treating me without respect will see it. 24 But because my servant Caʹleb had a different spirit and kept following after me wholeheartedly, I will certainly bring him into the land where he went, and his offspring will take possession of it. 25 Since the A·malʹek·ites and the Caʹnaan·ites are dwelling in the valley, you should turn back tomorrow and set off for the wilderness by the way of the Red Sea.”26 Jehovah then said to Moses and Aaron: 27 “How much longer will this evil assembly keep up this murmuring against me? I have heard what the Israelites are murmuring against me. 28 Say to them, ‘“As surely as I live,” declares Jehovah, “I will do to you just what I have heard you speak! 29 In this wilderness your corpses will fall, yes, the whole number of you from 20 years old and up who were registered, all of you who have murmured against me. 30 None of you will enter into the land that I swore to have you reside in except Caʹleb the son of Je·phunʹneh and Joshua the son of Nun.31 “‘“And I will bring in your children, who you said would become plunder, and they will get to know the land that you have rejected. 32 But your own corpses will fall in this wilderness. 33 Now your sons will become shepherds in the wilderness 40 years, and they will have to answer for your acts of unfaithfulness until the last one of your corpses falls in the wilderness. 34 According to the number of the days that you spied out the land, 40 days, a day for a year, a day for a year, you will answer for your errors 40 years, for you will know what it means to oppose me.35 “‘“I, Jehovah, have spoken. This is what I will do to all this evil assembly, those who have gathered together against me: In this wilderness they will come to their end, and here they will die. 36 The men whom Moses sent to spy out the land and who caused the whole assembly to murmur against him when they returned with a bad report about the land, 37 yes, the men who brought back the bad report about the land will be struck down and die before Jehovah. 38 But Joshua the son of Nun and Caʹleb the son of Je·phunʹneh, who were among those who went to spy out the land, will certainly keep living.”’”39 When Moses spoke these words to all the Israelites, the people began to mourn a great deal. 40 Moreover, they got up early in the morning and tried to go up to the top of the mountain, saying: “Here we are ready to go up to the place that Jehovah spoke about, for we have sinned.” 41 But Moses said: “Why are you going beyond the order of Jehovah? This will not succeed. 42 Do not go up, for Jehovah is not with you; and you will be defeated by your enemies. 43 For the A·malʹek·ites and the Caʹnaan·ites are there to face you, and you will fall by the sword. Because you turned away from following Jehovah, Jehovah will not be with you.”44 However, they presumptuously went toward the top of the mountain, but the ark of Jehovah’s covenant and Moses did not move away from the middle of the camp. 45 Then the A·malʹek·ites and the Caʹnaan·ites who were dwelling in that mountain came down and struck them, scattering them as far as Horʹmah.
15 Jehovah spoke further to Moses, saying: 2 “Speak to the Israelites and say to them, ‘When you eventually come into the land that I am giving you to dwell in 3 and you make an offering by fire to Jehovah from the herd or from the flock—whether a burnt offering or a sacrifice to perform a special vow or a voluntary offering or an offering during your seasonal festivals, in order to make a pleasing aroma to Jehovah— 4 the one presenting his offering must also present to Jehovah a grain offering of fine flour, a tenth of an eʹphah, mixed with a fourth of a hin of oil. 5 You should also offer wine as a drink offering, a fourth of a hin, together with the burnt offering or for the sacrifice of each male lamb. 6 Or for a ram, you should make a grain offering of two tenths of an eʹphah measure of fine flour mixed with a third of a hin of oil. 7 And you should present wine as a drink offering, a third of a hin, as a pleasing aroma to Jehovah.8 “‘But if you should offer a male of the herd as a burnt offering or a sacrifice to perform a special vow or communion sacrifices to Jehovah, 9 you should also present together with the male of the herd a grain offering of three tenths of an eʹphah measure of fine flour mixed with half a hin of oil. 10 You should also present wine as a drink offering, half a hin, as an offering made by fire, as a pleasing aroma to Jehovah. 11 This is what should be done for each bull or for each ram or for each of the male lambs or of the goats. 12 Whatever may be the number that you offer, that is what you should do for each one, according to their number. 13 This is how every native-born Israelite should present an offering made by fire, as a pleasing aroma to Jehovah.14 “‘If a foreigner who is residing with you or one who has been in your midst for many of your generations should also make an offering by fire, as a pleasing aroma to Jehovah, he should do just as you do. 15 You who are of the congregation and the foreigner who is residing with you will have one statute. It will be a lasting statute for all your generations. The foreign resident should be the same as you before Jehovah. 16 There should be one law and one judicial decision for you and for the foreigner who is residing with you.’”17 Jehovah went on to say to Moses: 18 “Speak to the Israelites and tell them, ‘When you come into the land where I am bringing you 19 and you eat any of the bread of the land, you should make a contribution to Jehovah. 20 You should make a contribution of the firstfruits of your coarse meal as ring-shaped loaves. Like the contribution of a threshing floor is the way you should contribute it. 21 Some of the firstfruits of your coarse meal you should give as a contribution to Jehovah throughout your generations.22 “‘Now if you make a mistake and fail to observe all these commandments that Jehovah has spoken to Moses, 23 all that Jehovah has commanded you through Moses from the day that Jehovah commanded and onward for your generations, 24 and if it was done by mistake and without the knowledge of the assembly, the whole assembly must offer one young bull as a burnt offering for a pleasing aroma to Jehovah, together with its grain offering and its drink offering according to the regular procedure, and one young goat as a sin offering. 25 The priest will make atonement for the whole assembly of the Israelites, and it will be forgiven them, because it was a mistake, and they brought as their offering an offering made by fire to Jehovah and their sin offering before Jehovah for their mistake. 26 It will be forgiven the whole assembly of the Israelites and the foreigner who is residing in their midst, because it was by mistake on the part of all the people.27 “‘If any person should sin by mistake, then he must present a female goat in its first year for a sin offering. 28 And the priest will make atonement for the person who made a mistake by an unintentional sin before Jehovah, so as to make atonement for it, and it will be forgiven him. 29 As for the native-born among the Israelites and the foreigner who is residing in their midst, there should be one law for you in the matter of doing something unintentionally.30 “‘But the person who does something deliberately, whether he is native-born or a foreign resident, is blaspheming Jehovah and must be cut off from among his people. 31 Because he has despised Jehovah’s word and broken his commandment, that person should be cut off without fail. His own error is upon him.’”32 While the Israelites were in the wilderness, they found a man collecting pieces of wood on the Sabbath day. 33 Those who found him collecting wood brought him up to Moses and Aaron and the whole assembly. 34 They committed him into custody because it had not been specified what should be done to him.35 And Jehovah said to Moses: “The man should be put to death without fail, and the whole assembly should stone him outside the camp.” 36 So the whole assembly brought him outside the camp and stoned him so that he died, just as Jehovah had commanded Moses.37 Jehovah went on to say this to Moses: 38 “Speak to the Israelites and tell them that they must make for themselves fringed edges on the skirts of their garments throughout their generations, and they are to put a blue string above the fringed edge of the skirt. 39 ‘You must have this fringed edge so that you will see it and remember all the commandments of Jehovah and observe them. You must not follow your own hearts and eyes, which are leading you to spiritual prostitution. 40 This will help you remember, and you will observe all my commandments and be holy to your God. 41 I am Jehovah your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt in order to prove myself your God. I am Jehovah your God.’”
16 Then Korʹah the son of Izʹhar, the son of Koʹhath, the son of Leʹvi, got up together with Daʹthan and A·biʹram the sons of E·liʹab, and On the son of Peʹleth, of the sons of Reuʹben. 2 They rose up against Moses along with 250 Israelite men, chieftains of the assembly, chosen ones of the congregation, prominent men. 3 So they gathered together against Moses and Aaron and said to them: “We have had enough of you! The whole assembly is holy, all of them, and Jehovah is in their midst. Why, then, should you exalt yourselves above the congregation of Jehovah?”4 When Moses heard this, he at once fell facedown. 5 Then he said to Korʹah and to all his supporters: “In the morning Jehovah will make known who belongs to him and who is holy and who should approach him, and whomever he may choose will approach him. 6 Do this: Take fire holders, Korʹah and all your supporters, 7 and put fire in them and place incense on them before Jehovah tomorrow, and the man whom Jehovah will choose, he is the holy one. You sons of Leʹvi have gone far enough!”8 Moses then said to Korʹah: “Listen, please, you sons of Leʹvi. 9 Does it seem to you such a little thing that the God of Israel has separated you from the assembly of Israel and allowed you to approach him in order to perform the service of Jehovah’s tabernacle and to stand before the assembly to minister to them, 10 and that he brought you near to him along with all your brothers, the sons of Leʹvi? Must you also try to secure the priesthood? 11 For this reason, you and all your supporters who are gathering together are against Jehovah. As for Aaron, who is he that you should murmur against him?”12 Moses later sent for Daʹthan and A·biʹram the sons of E·liʹab, but they said: “We are not going to come! 13 Is it so little a thing that you have brought us up out of a land flowing with milk and honey to put us to death in the wilderness? Now do you also want to make yourself an absolute ruler over us? 14 As it is, you have not brought us into any land flowing with milk and honey or given us an inheritance of field and vineyard. Would you bore out the eyes of those men? We are not going to come!”15 So Moses became very angry and said to Jehovah: “Do not turn to look at their grain offering. Not one donkey have I taken away from them, nor have I harmed one of them.”16 Then Moses said to Korʹah: “Present yourself with all your supporters before Jehovah tomorrow, you and they and Aaron. 17 Each one should take his fire holder and put incense on it, and each will present his fire holder before Jehovah, 250 fire holders, together with you and Aaron, each with his fire holder.” 18 So each of them took his fire holder, and they put fire and incense on them and stood at the entrance of the tent of meeting together with Moses and Aaron. 19 When Korʹah had gathered his supporters against them at the entrance of the tent of meeting, Jehovah’s glory appeared to all the assembly.20 Jehovah now told Moses and Aaron: 21 “Separate yourselves from among this group, so that I may exterminate them in an instant.” 22 At this, they fell with their faces to the ground and said: “O God, the God of the spirit of all people, will one man’s sin cause you to become indignant against the entire assembly?”23 Jehovah then said to Moses: 24 “Speak to the assembly and tell them, ‘Get away from around the tents of Korʹah, Daʹthan, and A·biʹram!’”25 Then Moses got up and went to Daʹthan and A·biʹram, and the elders of Israel went with him. 26 He told the assembly: “Move away, please, from the tents of these wicked men and do not touch anything that belongs to them, so that you may not be swept away in all their sin.” 27 They immediately moved away from the tents of Korʹah, Daʹthan, and A·biʹram, from every side, and Daʹthan and A·biʹram came out, taking their stand at the entrance of their tents, together with their wives, their sons, and their little children.28 Then Moses said: “By this you will know that Jehovah has sent me to do all these things, that it is not of my own heart: 29 If these people die a natural death as all men do and if their punishment is the same as that of all mankind, then Jehovah has not sent me. 30 But if Jehovah does something extraordinary with them and the ground opens and swallows them and everything that belongs to them and they go down alive into the Grave, you will certainly know that these men have treated Jehovah disrespectfully.”31 As soon as he finished speaking all these words, the ground beneath them split apart. 32 And the earth opened and swallowed them up, along with their households and everyone who belonged to Korʹah and all their goods. 33 So they and all who belonged to them went down alive into the Grave, and the earth covered them over, so that they perished from the midst of the congregation. 34 All the Israelites who were around them fled at their screaming, for they said: “We are afraid that the earth may swallow us up!” 35 Then a fire came out from Jehovah and consumed the 250 men offering the incense.36 Jehovah now said to Moses: 37 “Tell El·e·aʹzar the son of Aaron the priest to take the fire holders out of the fire, for they are holy. Also tell him to scatter the fire some distance away. 38 The fire holders of the men who sinned at the cost of their lives should be made into thin metal plates to overlay the altar, because they presented them before Jehovah, and they became holy. They should serve as a sign to the Israelites.” 39 So El·e·aʹzar the priest took the copper fire holders that had been presented by those who were burned up, and beat them to overlay the altar, 40 just as Jehovah had told him through Moses. It was a reminder for the Israelites that no unauthorized person who is not of the offspring of Aaron should approach to burn incense before Jehovah and that no one should become like Korʹah and his supporters.41 On the very next day, the whole assembly of the Israelites began to murmur against Moses and Aaron, saying: “You two have put Jehovah’s people to death.” 42 When the assembly had gathered together against Moses and Aaron, they then turned toward the tent of meeting, and look! the cloud covered it, and Jehovah’s glory began to appear.43 Moses and Aaron went before the tent of meeting, 44 and Jehovah said to Moses: 45 “You men, remove yourselves from among this assembly, so that I may exterminate them in an instant.” At this they fell with their faces to the ground. 46 Moses then said to Aaron: “Take the fire holder and put fire from the altar in it and put incense on it and go quickly to the assembly and make atonement for them, because indignation has gone out from Jehovah. The plague has started!” 47 Aaron at once took it, just as Moses had said, and ran into the midst of the congregation, and look! the plague had started among the people. So he put the incense on the fire holder and began making atonement for the people. 48 He kept standing between the dead and the living, and the scourge eventually stopped. 49 Those who died from the scourge amounted to 14,700, besides those dead on account of Korʹah. 50 When at last Aaron returned to Moses at the entrance of the tent of meeting, the scourge had been stopped.
17 Jehovah now said to Moses: 2 “Speak to the Israelites and take from them one rod for each paternal house, from the chieftains of each paternal house, 12 rods in all. Write the name of each one on his rod. 3 You should write Aaron’s name on Leʹvi’s rod, because there is one rod for the head of each paternal house. 4 Deposit the rods in the tent of meeting before the Testimony, where I regularly present myself to you. 5 And the rod of the man whom I choose will bud, and I will put a stop to the murmuring of the Israelites against me, which they are also murmuring against you.”6 So Moses spoke to the Israelites, and all their chieftains gave him rods—a rod for each chieftain of a paternal house, 12 rods—and Aaron’s rod was among their rods. 7 Then Moses deposited the rods before Jehovah in the tent of the Testimony.8 On the next day, when Moses went into the tent of the Testimony, look! Aaron’s rod for the house of Leʹvi had budded and was bringing forth buds and blossoming flowers and bearing ripe almonds. 9 Moses then brought out all the rods from before Jehovah to all the people of Israel. They looked at them, and each man took his own rod.10 Jehovah then said to Moses: “Put Aaron’s rod back before the Testimony as something to be kept for a sign to the sons of rebelliousness, so that their murmurings against me may cease and so that they may not die.” 11 Moses immediately did just as Jehovah had commanded him. He did just so.12 The Israelites then said to Moses: “Now we will die, we will surely perish, we are all going to perish! 13 Anyone who even comes close to Jehovah’s tabernacle will die! Must we end up dying that way?”
18 Jehovah then said to Aaron: “You and your sons and your paternal house with you will be answerable for any error against the sanctuary, and you and your sons with you will be answerable for any error against your priesthood. 2 Also bring near your brothers of the tribe of Leʹvi, your ancestral tribe, so that they may join you and minister to you and your sons before the tent of the Testimony. 3 They are to fulfill their responsibilities to you and to the entire tent. However, they must not come near the utensils of the holy place and the altar, so that neither they nor you may die. 4 They will join you and carry out their responsibilities regarding the tent of meeting and all the service of the tent, and no unauthorized person may come near to you. 5 You must carry out your responsibility toward the holy place and the altar, so that no further indignation may come against the people of Israel. 6 I myself have taken your brothers, the Levites, from among the Israelites as a gift for you. They are given to Jehovah to care for the service of the tent of meeting. 7 You and your sons are responsible for your priestly duties pertaining to the altar and what is inside the curtain, and you are to render this service. I have given the service of the priesthood as a gift to you, and any unauthorized person who approaches should be put to death.”8 Jehovah spoke further to Aaron: “I myself put you in charge of the contributions made to me. I have given to you and to your sons a portion of all the holy things contributed by the Israelites as a permanent allowance. 9 This will be yours out of the most holy offerings made by fire: every offering they make, including their grain offerings and their sin offerings and their guilt offerings that they bring to me. It is something most holy for you and for your sons. 10 In a most holy place you should eat it. Every male may eat it. It will be something holy to you. 11 This also belongs to you: the gifts they contribute together with all the wave offerings of the Israelites. I have given them to you and your sons and your daughters with you as a permanent allowance. Everyone clean in your house may eat it.12 “All the best of the oil and all the best of the new wine and the grain, their firstfruits, which they give to Jehovah, I give them to you. 13 The first ripe fruits of everything from their land, which they will bring to Jehovah, will become yours. Everyone clean in your house may eat it.14 “Every devoted thing in Israel should become yours.15 “Every firstborn of all living things, which they will present to Jehovah, whether man or animal, should become yours. However, you should without fail redeem the firstborn of mankind, and the firstborn of the unclean animals you should redeem. 16 You should redeem it with the redemption price when it is a month old and up, by the estimated value of five silver shekels, according to the standard shekel of the holy place. It is 20 geʹrahs. 17 Only the firstborn bull or firstborn male lamb or firstborn goat you should not redeem. They are something holy. You should sprinkle their blood on the altar, and their fat you should make smoke as an offering made by fire for a pleasing aroma to Jehovah. 18 And their flesh should become yours. Like the breast of the wave offering and like the right leg, it should become yours. 19 All the holy contributions that the Israelites will contribute to Jehovah, I have given to you and your sons and your daughters with you as a permanent allowance. It is a lasting covenant of salt before Jehovah for you and your offspring with you.”20 Jehovah went on to say to Aaron: “In their land you will not have an inheritance, and no portion of land among them will become yours. I am your portion and your inheritance in the midst of the Israelites.21 “Now see that I have given to the sons of Leʹvi every tenth part in Israel as an inheritance in return for the service they are carrying out, the service of the tent of meeting. 22 No longer may the people of Israel approach the tent of meeting, or else they will incur sin and die. 23 The Levites themselves are to carry out the service of the tent of meeting, and they are the ones who will answer for their error. It is a lasting statute during all your generations that they should not take possession of an inheritance among the Israelites. 24 For I have given to the Levites as an inheritance the tenth part contributed by the people of Israel, which they will contribute to Jehovah. That is why I have said to them, ‘In the midst of the Israelites, they should not take possession of an inheritance.’”25 Then Jehovah said to Moses: 26 “You should tell the Levites, ‘You will receive from the Israelites the tenth part that I have given to you from them for your inheritance, and you should contribute from it a tenth part of the tenth part as a contribution to Jehovah. 27 And it will be considered your contribution, as though it were the grain of the threshing floor or the full production of the winepress or oil press. 28 In this way you will also give a contribution to Jehovah from all the tenth parts that you receive from the Israelites, and from them you are to give the contribution for Jehovah to Aaron the priest. 29 You will make every sort of contribution to Jehovah from the very best of all the gifts given to you as something holy.’30 “And you must say to them, ‘When you contribute the best of them, then it will be considered for the Levites as the produce of the threshing floor and as the produce of the winepress or oil press. 31 You and your household may eat it in any place, because it is your wages in return for your service at the tent of meeting. 32 You will not incur sin in this as long as you contribute the best from them, and you must not profane the holy things of the Israelites, or you will die.’”
19 Jehovah spoke again to Moses and Aaron, saying: 2 “This is a statute of the law that Jehovah has commanded, ‘Tell the Israelites that they should take for you a sound red cow in which there is no defect and upon which no yoke has come. 3 You are to give it to El·e·aʹzar the priest, and he will lead it outside the camp, and it will be slaughtered before him. 4 Then El·e·aʹzar the priest will take some of its blood with his finger and spatter its blood seven times straight toward the front of the tent of meeting. 5 The cow will then be burned before his eyes. Its skin and its flesh and its blood together with its dung will be burned. 6 And the priest will take cedarwood, hyssop, and scarlet material and throw them into the fire where the cow is being burned. 7 The priest will then wash his garments and bathe himself in water, and afterward he may come into the camp; but the priest will be unclean until the evening.8 “‘The one who burned the cow will wash his garments in water and bathe himself in water, and he will be unclean until the evening.9 “‘A clean man will gather up the ashes of the cow and deposit them outside the camp in a clean place, and they should be kept by the assembly of the Israelites to prepare water that will be used for cleansing. It is a sin offering. 10 The one gathering the ashes of the cow will wash his garments and be unclean until the evening.“‘This will serve the Israelites and the foreigner who is residing in their midst as a lasting statute. 11 Anyone touching any dead person will be unclean for seven days. 12 Such one should purify himself with the water on the third day, and on the seventh day he will be clean. But if he does not purify himself on the third day, on the seventh day he will not be clean. 13 Everyone who touches the corpse of any dead person and does not purify himself has defiled Jehovah’s tabernacle, and that person must be cut off from Israel. Because the water for cleansing has not been sprinkled on him, he continues unclean. His uncleanness remains upon him.14 “‘This is the law that applies when a man dies in a tent: Everyone who enters the tent and everyone who was already in the tent will be unclean for seven days. 15 Every opened container with no lid tied on it is unclean. 16 Everyone in the open field who touches someone killed with the sword or a corpse or the bone of a man or a burial place will be unclean for seven days. 17 They should take for the unclean one some of the ashes of the sin offering that was burned and pour running water on them in a container. 18 Then a clean man will take hyssop and dip it into the water and spatter it on the tent and on all the containers and on the people who were there and on the one who touched the bone or the slain one or the corpse or the burial place. 19 The clean person will spatter it on the unclean one on the third day and on the seventh day, and he will purify him from sin on the seventh day; then he should wash his garments and bathe in water, and he will become clean in the evening.20 “‘But the man who is unclean and who will not purify himself, that person must be cut off from the congregation, because he has defiled Jehovah’s sanctuary. The water for cleansing was not sprinkled on him, so he is unclean.21 “‘This will serve as a lasting statute for them: The one spattering the water for cleansing should wash his garments, and the one touching the water for cleansing will be unclean until the evening. 22 Anything the unclean one touches will be unclean, and the person who touches it will be unclean until the evening.’”
2 Jehovah now spoke to Moses and Aaron, saying: 2 “The Israelites should encamp where their three-tribe division is assigned, each man near the banner of his paternal house. They should camp facing the tent of meeting, all around it.3 “Those camping on the east side, toward the sunrise, will be the three-tribe division of the encampment of Judah by their companies; the chieftain for the sons of Judah is Nahʹshon the son of Am·minʹa·dab. 4 Those registered in his army are 74,600. 5 Camping alongside him will be the tribe of Isʹsa·char; the chieftain for the sons of Isʹsa·char is Ne·thanʹel the son of Zuʹar. 6 Those registered in his army are 54,400. 7 Next is the tribe of Zebʹu·lun; the chieftain for the sons of Zebʹu·lun is E·liʹab the son of Heʹlon. 8 Those registered in his army are 57,400.9 “All those registered in the armies of the camp of Judah are 186,400. They should break camp first.10 “The three-tribe division of the encampment of Reuʹben by their companies will be toward the south; the chieftain for the sons of Reuʹben is E·liʹzur the son of Shedʹe·ur. 11 Those registered in his army are 46,500. 12 Camping alongside him will be the tribe of Simʹe·on; the chieftain for the sons of Simʹe·on is She·luʹmi·el the son of Zu·ri·shadʹdai. 13 Those registered in his army are 59,300. 14 Next is the tribe of Gad; the chieftain for the sons of Gad is E·liʹa·saph the son of Reuʹel. 15 Those registered in his army are 45,650.16 “All those registered in the armies of the camp of Reuʹben are 151,450, and they should break camp second.17 “When the tent of meeting is moved, the camp of the Levites should be in the middle of the other camps.“They should travel in the same order as they encamp, with each in his place, according to their three-tribe divisions.18 “The three-tribe division of the encampment of Eʹphra·im by their companies will be toward the west; the chieftain for the sons of Eʹphra·im is E·lishʹa·ma the son of Am·miʹhud. 19 Those registered in his army are 40,500. 20 Next to him will be the tribe of Ma·nasʹseh; the chieftain for the sons of Ma·nasʹseh is Ga·maʹli·el the son of Pe·dahʹzur. 21 Those registered in his army are 32,200. 22 Next is the tribe of Benjamin; the chieftain for the sons of Benjamin is Abʹi·dan the son of Gid·e·oʹni. 23 Those registered in his army are 35,400.24 “All those registered in the armies of the camp of Eʹphra·im are 108,100, and they should break camp third.25 “The three-tribe division of the encampment of Dan by their companies will be toward the north; the chieftain for the sons of Dan is A·hi·eʹzer the son of Am·mi·shadʹdai. 26 Those registered in his army are 62,700. 27 Camping alongside him will be the tribe of Ashʹer; the chieftain for the sons of Ashʹer is Paʹgi·el the son of Ochʹran. 28 Those registered in his army are 41,500. 29 Next is the tribe of Naphʹta·li; the chieftain for the sons of Naphʹta·li is A·hiʹra the son of Eʹnan. 30 Those registered in his army are 53,400.31 “All those registered in the camp of Dan are 157,600. They should break camp last, according to their three-tribe divisions.”32 These were the Israelites who were registered according to their paternal houses; the total of those in the camps registered for the army was 603,550. 33 But the Levites did not get registered along with the other Israelites, just as Jehovah had commanded Moses. 34 The Israelites did everything that Jehovah had commanded Moses. This is how they encamped by their three-tribe divisions and how they broke camp, each by family and according to their paternal houses.
20 In the first month, the entire assembly of the Israelites came into the wilderness of Zin, and the people began dwelling in Kaʹdesh. It was there that Mirʹi·am died and was buried.2 Now there was no water for the assembly, and they gathered together against Moses and Aaron. 3 The people were quarreling with Moses, saying: “If only we had died when our brothers died before Jehovah! 4 Why have you brought Jehovah’s congregation into this wilderness for us and our livestock to die here? 5 And why have you led us up out of Egypt to bring us into this evil place? It is no place for seed and figs and vines and pomegranates, and there is no water to drink.” 6 Then Moses and Aaron came from before the congregation to the entrance of the tent of meeting and fell with their faces to the ground, and Jehovah’s glory began to appear to them.7 Then Jehovah said to Moses: 8 “Take the rod and call the assembly together, you and Aaron your brother, and speak to the crag before their eyes that it may give its water, and you will bring out water for them from the crag and give the assembly and their livestock something to drink.”9 So Moses took the rod from before Jehovah, just as He had commanded him. 10 Then Moses and Aaron called the congregation together before the crag, and he said to them: “Hear, now, you rebels! Must we bring out water for you from this crag?” 11 With that Moses lifted his hand up and struck the crag twice with his rod, and much water began to pour out, and the assembly and their livestock began to drink.12 Jehovah later said to Moses and Aaron: “Because you did not show faith in me and sanctify me before the eyes of the people of Israel, you will not bring this congregation into the land that I will give them.” 13 These are the waters of Merʹi·bah, where the Israelites quarreled with Jehovah, so that he was sanctified among them.14 Then Moses sent messengers from Kaʹdesh to the king of Eʹdom: “This is what your brother Israel says, ‘You well know all the hardship that we have experienced. 15 Our fathers went to Egypt, and we dwelled in Egypt many years, and the Egyptians mistreated us and our fathers. 16 Finally we cried out to Jehovah, and he heard us and sent an angel and brought us out of Egypt, and here we are in Kaʹdesh, a city on the border of your territory. 17 Please let us pass through your land. We will not pass through any field or vineyard, and we will not drink the water of any well. We will march on the King’s Road without turning to the right or the left until we pass through your territory.’”18 However, Eʹdom said to him: “You may not pass through our territory. If you do, I will come out with the sword to meet you.” 19 In turn the Israelites said to him: “By the highway we will go up, and if we and our livestock drink your water, we will pay for it. We want nothing more than to pass through on foot.” 20 Still he said: “You may not pass through.” With that Eʹdom came out to encounter him with many people and a strong army. 21 So Eʹdom refused to allow Israel to pass through his territory; therefore, Israel turned away from him.22 The people of Israel, the entire assembly, departed from Kaʹdesh and came to Mount Hor. 23 Then Jehovah said to Moses and Aaron in Mount Hor by the border of the land of Eʹdom: 24 “Aaron will be gathered to his people. He will not enter the land that I will give to the Israelites, because you both rebelled against my order regarding the waters of Merʹi·bah. 25 Take Aaron and his son El·e·aʹzar and bring them up into Mount Hor. 26 Remove Aaron’s garments and clothe El·e·aʹzar his son with them, and Aaron will die there.”27 So Moses did just as Jehovah had commanded, and they climbed Mount Hor before the eyes of all the assembly. 28 Then Moses removed Aaron’s garments and clothed El·e·aʹzar his son with them. After that Aaron died there on the top of the mountain. And Moses and El·e·aʹzar came down from the mountain. 29 When all the assembly saw that Aaron had died, the entire house of Israel wept for Aaron for 30 days.
21 When the Caʹnaan·ite king of Aʹrad, who dwelled in the Negʹeb, heard that Israel had come by the way of Athʹa·rim, he attacked Israel and carried away some of them as captives. 2 So Israel made this vow to Jehovah: “If you give this people into my hand, I will without fail devote their cities to destruction.” 3 So Jehovah listened to Israel’s voice and gave the Caʹnaan·ites over to them, and they devoted them and their cities to destruction. Therefore, they named the place Horʹmah.4 As they continued their journey from Mount Hor by the way of the Red Sea in order to go around the land of Eʹdom, the people became weary of the journey. 5 And the people kept speaking against God and Moses, saying: “Why have you brought us up out of Egypt to die in the wilderness? There is no food and no water, and we have come to hate this contemptible bread.” 6 So Jehovah sent poisonous serpents among the people, and they kept biting the people, so that many Israelites died.7 So the people came to Moses and said: “We have sinned by speaking against Jehovah and against you. Intercede with Jehovah so that he may remove the serpents from us.” And Moses interceded on behalf of the people. 8 Then Jehovah said to Moses: “Make a replica of a poisonous snake and put it on a pole. Then when anyone has been bitten, he will have to look at it in order to keep alive.” 9 Moses at once made a serpent of copper and put it on the pole, and whenever a serpent had bitten a man and he looked at the copper serpent, he survived.10 After that the Israelites departed and camped in Oʹboth. 11 Then they departed from Oʹboth and camped in Iʹye-abʹa·rim, in the wilderness that faces Moʹab, toward the east. 12 From there they departed and camped by the Valley of Zeʹred. 13 From there they departed and camped in the region of the Arʹnon, which is in the wilderness that extends from the border of the Amʹor·ites, for the Arʹnon is the boundary of Moʹab, between Moʹab and the Amʹor·ites. 14 That is why the book of the Wars of Jehovah speaks of “Vaʹheb in Suʹphah and the valleys of Arʹnon, 15 and the descent of the valleys, which extends toward the settlement of Ar and adjoins the border of Moʹab.”16 Next they went on to Beʹer. This is the well about which Jehovah said to Moses: “Gather the people, and let me give them water.”17 At that time, Israel sang this song:“Spring up, O well!—Respond to it!18 The well that princes dug, that nobles of the people excavated,With a commander’s staff and with their own staffs.”Then they went from the wilderness on to Matʹta·nah, 19 from Matʹta·nah on to Na·halʹi·el, and from Na·halʹi·el on to Baʹmoth. 20 They went from Baʹmoth on to the valley that is in the territory of Moʹab, on top of Pisʹgah, which overlooks Je·shiʹmon.21 Israel now sent messengers to Siʹhon, the king of the Amʹor·ites, saying: 22 “Let us pass through your land. We will not turn aside into a field or a vineyard. We will not drink water from any well. We will march on the King’s Road until we pass through your territory.” 23 But Siʹhon did not allow Israel to pass through his territory. Instead, Siʹhon gathered all his people and went out against Israel in the wilderness and came to Jaʹhaz and began fighting with Israel. 24 But Israel defeated him with the sword and took possession of his land from the Arʹnon to the Jabʹbok, near the Amʹmon·ites, because Jaʹzer borders the territory of the Amʹmon·ites.25 So Israel took all these cities, and they began dwelling in all the cities of the Amʹor·ites, in Heshʹbon and all its dependent towns. 26 For Heshʹbon was the city of Siʹhon, the king of the Amʹor·ites, who had fought with the king of Moʹab and taken all his land from him as far as the Arʹnon. 27 That is what gave rise to the taunting proverbial saying:“Come to Heshʹbon.Let the city of Siʹhon be built and firmly established.28 For a fire came out of Heshʹbon, a flame from the town of Siʹhon.It has consumed Ar of Moʹab, the lords of the high places of the Arʹnon.29 Woe to you, Moʹab! You will be destroyed, O people of Cheʹmosh!He makes his sons fugitives and his daughters captives of Siʹhon, the king of the Amʹor·ites.30 Let us shoot at them;Heshʹbon will be destroyed as far as Diʹbon;Let us desolate it as far as Noʹphah;Fire will spread as far as Medʹe·ba.”31 So Israel began to dwell in the land of the Amʹor·ites. 32 Moses then sent some men to spy on Jaʹzer. They captured its dependent towns and drove out the Amʹor·ites who were there. 33 After that they turned and went up by way of Baʹshan. And Og the king of Baʹshan came out with all his people to meet them in battle at Edʹre·i. 34 Jehovah said to Moses: “Do not be afraid of him, for I will give him and all his people and his land into your hand, and you will do to him just as you did to Siʹhon the king of the Amʹor·ites, who lived in Heshʹbon.” 35 So they kept striking him down, along with his sons and all his people, until none of his people survived, and they took possession of his land.
22 Then the Israelites departed and camped on the desert plains of Moʹab across the Jordan from Jerʹi·cho. 2 Now Baʹlak the son of Zipʹpor saw all that Israel had done to the Amʹor·ites, 3 and Moʹab became very frightened of the people, because they were so many; indeed, Moʹab felt sick with fear because of the Israelites. 4 So Moʹab said to the elders of Midʹi·an: “Now this congregation will devour all our surroundings, just as a bull devours the grass in the field.”Baʹlak the son of Zipʹpor was king of Moʹab at that time. 5 He sent messengers to Baʹlaam the son of Beʹor at Peʹthor, which is by the River in his native land. He summoned him, saying: “Look! A people has come out of Egypt. Look! They have covered the face of the earth, and they are dwelling right in front of me. 6 Now, please, come and curse this people for me, for they are mightier than I am. Perhaps I can defeat them and drive them out of the land, for I well know that the one whom you bless is blessed and the one whom you curse is cursed.”7 So the elders of Moʹab and the elders of Midʹi·an traveled with the fee for divination in their hands and went to Baʹlaam and conveyed to him Baʹlak’s message. 8 At that he said to them: “Spend the night here, and I will bring back to you whatever word Jehovah speaks to me.” So the princes of Moʹab stayed with Baʹlaam.9 Then God came to Baʹlaam and said: “Who are these men with you?” 10 Baʹlaam said to the true God: “Baʹlak the son of Zipʹpor, the king of Moʹab, has sent me a message, saying, 11 ‘Look! The people who are coming out of Egypt are covering the face of the earth. Now come and put a curse on them for me. Perhaps I may be able to fight against them and drive them out.’” 12 But God said to Baʹlaam: “You must not go with them. You must not curse the people, for they are blessed.”13 Baʹlaam got up in the morning and said to the princes of Baʹlak: “Go to your land, for Jehovah has refused to let me go with you.” 14 So the princes of Moʹab departed and returned to Baʹlak and said: “Baʹlaam has refused to come with us.”15 However, Baʹlak again sent princes, more numerous and more distinguished than the first group. 16 They came to Baʹlaam and said to him: “This is what Baʹlak the son of Zipʹpor has said, ‘Please do not let anything hinder you from coming to me, 17 for I will honor you greatly and I will do anything you tell me to do. So come, please, and curse this people for me.’” 18 But Baʹlaam answered the servants of Baʹlak: “If Baʹlak were to give me his own house full of silver and gold, I could not do anything beyond the order of Jehovah my God, whether small or great. 19 But please stay here tonight also, so that I may learn what else Jehovah will tell me.”20 Then God came to Baʹlaam by night and said to him: “If these men have come to summon you, go along with them. But you may speak only the words that I tell you to say.” 21 So Baʹlaam got up in the morning and saddled his donkey and went with the princes of Moʹab.22 But God’s anger blazed because he was going, and Jehovah’s angel stationed himself in the road to resist him. Now Baʹlaam was riding on his donkey, and two of his attendants were with him. 23 And when the donkey saw Jehovah’s angel standing in the road with a drawn sword in his hand, it tried to turn off the road into the field. But Baʹlaam began to beat the donkey to make it return to the road. 24 Then Jehovah’s angel stood in a narrow path between two vineyards, with stone walls on both sides. 25 When the donkey saw Jehovah’s angel, it began to squeeze itself against the wall and it jammed Baʹlaam’s foot against the wall, and Baʹlaam began beating it again.26 Jehovah’s angel now passed by again and stood in a narrow place where there was no way to turn to the right or to the left. 27 When the donkey saw Jehovah’s angel, it lay down under Baʹlaam, so Baʹlaam became furious and kept beating the donkey with his staff. 28 Finally Jehovah caused the donkey to speak, and it said to Baʹlaam: “What have I done to you to make you beat me these three times?” 29 Baʹlaam replied to the donkey: “It is because you have made a fool of me. If only I had a sword in my hand, I would kill you!” 30 Then the donkey said to Baʹlaam: “Am I not your donkey that you have ridden on all your life until today? Have I ever treated you this way before?” He replied: “No!” 31 Then Jehovah uncovered Baʹlaam’s eyes, and he saw Jehovah’s angel standing in the road with a drawn sword in his hand. At once he bowed low and prostrated himself on his face.32 Then Jehovah’s angel said to him: “Why have you beaten your donkey these three times? Look! I myself came out to offer resistance, because your way is in defiance of my will. 33 The donkey saw me and tried to turn away from me these three times. Supposing it had not turned away from me! By now I would have killed you and let the donkey live.” 34 Baʹlaam said to Jehovah’s angel: “I have sinned, because I did not know that it was you standing in the road to meet me. And now if it is bad in your eyes, I will go back.” 35 But Jehovah’s angel said to Baʹlaam: “Go with the men, but you may speak only the words that I tell you.” So Baʹlaam continued going with the princes of Baʹlak.36 When Baʹlak heard that Baʹlaam had come, he immediately went out to meet him at the city of Moʹab, which is on the bank of the Arʹnon on the border of the territory. 37 Baʹlak said to Baʹlaam: “Did I not send for you? Why did you not come to me? Did you think I am not able to honor you greatly?” 38 Baʹlaam replied to Baʹlak: “Well, I have come to you now. But will I be allowed to say anything? I can only speak words that God puts in my mouth.”39 So Baʹlaam went with Baʹlak, and they came to Kirʹi·ath-huʹzoth. 40 Baʹlak sacrificed cattle and sheep and sent some to Baʹlaam and the princes who were with him. 41 In the morning Baʹlak took Baʹlaam and brought him up to Baʹmoth-baʹal; from there he could see all the people.
23 Then Baʹlaam said to Baʹlak: “Build on this spot seven altars, and prepare seven bulls and seven rams for me.” 2 Baʹlak immediately did just as Baʹlaam had said. And Baʹlak and Baʹlaam offered up a bull and a ram on each altar. 3 Baʹlaam then said to Baʹlak: “Stay here by your burnt offering, and I will go. Perhaps Jehovah will get in touch with me. Whatever he reveals to me, I will tell you.” So he went to a barren hill.4 Then God got in touch with Baʹlaam, who said to Him: “I set the seven altars in rows, and I offered up a bull and a ram on each altar.” 5 Jehovah put this word in the mouth of Baʹlaam: “Return to Baʹlak, and this is what you are to say.” 6 So he returned and saw that Baʹlak and all the princes of Moʹab were standing by his burnt offering. 7 Then he spoke this proverbial saying:“Baʹlak the king of Moʹab has brought me from Aʹram,From the mountains of the east:‘Do come to curse Jacob for me.Yes, come to denounce Israel.’ 8 How could I put a curse on those whom God has not cursed?And how could I denounce those whom Jehovah has not denounced? 9 From the top of the rocks I see them,And from the hills I see them.As a people they dwell there alone;They do not count themselves among the nations.10 Who can number the dust particles of JacobOr count even the fourth part of Israel?Let me die the death of the upright,And let my end be like theirs.”11 Baʹlak then said to Baʹlaam: “What have you done to me? I brought you to put a curse on my enemies, and here you have done nothing but bless them.” 12 He answered: “Must I not speak whatever Jehovah puts in my mouth?”13 Baʹlak said to him: “Please come with me to another place from which you can see them. You will see only a part of them; you will not see them all. Put a curse on them for me from there.” 14 So he took him to the field of Zoʹphim, to the top of Pisʹgah, and built seven altars and offered up a bull and a ram on each altar. 15 So Baʹlaam said to Baʹlak: “Stay here by your burnt offering while I get in touch with Him over there.” 16 And Jehovah got in touch with Baʹlaam and put this word in his mouth: “Return to Baʹlak, and this is what you are to say.” 17 So he came to him and saw that he was waiting by his burnt offering, and the princes of Moʹab were with him. Baʹlak asked him: “What has Jehovah said?” 18 Then he spoke this proverbial saying:“Get up, Baʹlak, and listen.Hear me, O son of Zipʹpor.19 God is not a mere man who tells lies,Nor a son of man who changes his mind.When he says something, will he not do it?When he speaks, will he not carry it out?20 Look! I have been taken to bless;Now He has blessed, and I cannot reverse it.21 He does not tolerate any magical power against Jacob,And he does not allow any trouble against Israel.Jehovah his God is with them,And he is loudly hailed as king among them.22 God is bringing them out of Egypt.He is like the horns of a wild bull for them.23 For there are no omens of doom against Jacob,Nor any divination against Israel.At this time it may be said about Jacob and Israel:‘Look at what God has done!’24 Here is a people who will rise up like a lion,And like the lion, it will raise itself up.It will not lie down until it eats preyAnd drinks the blood of the slain ones.”25 Baʹlak then said to Baʹlaam: “If on the one hand you cannot put any curse on him, then on the other hand you should not bless him either.” 26 Baʹlaam answered Baʹlak: “Did I not say to you, ‘I will do all that Jehovah says’?”27 Baʹlak said to Baʹlaam: “Please come and let me take you to yet another place. Perhaps it will be right in the eyes of the true God for you to put a curse on him for me from there.” 28 So Baʹlak took Baʹlaam to the top of Peʹor, which looks toward Je·shiʹmon. 29 Then Baʹlaam said to Baʹlak: “Build seven altars on this spot, and prepare seven bulls and seven rams for me.” 30 So Baʹlak did just as Baʹlaam had said, and he offered up a bull and a ram on each altar.
24 When Baʹlaam saw that it pleased Jehovah to bless Israel, he did not go away again to search for omens of doom, but he turned his face to the wilderness. 2 When Baʹlaam raised his eyes and saw Israel encamped by his tribes, then the spirit of God came upon him. 3 He then spoke this proverbial saying:“The saying of Baʹlaam the son of Beʹor,And the saying of a man whose eyes have been opened, 4 The saying of the one hearing the word of God,Who saw a vision of the Almighty,Who has bowed down with his eyes uncovered: 5 How beautiful are your tents, O Jacob,Your tabernacles, O Israel! 6 Like the valleys they have extended a long way,Like gardens by the river,Like aloes that Jehovah has planted,Like cedars by the waters. 7 Water keeps trickling from his two leather buckets,And his seed is sown by many waters.His king also will be greater than Aʹgag,And his kingdom will be exalted. 8 God is bringing him out of Egypt;He is like the horns of a wild bull for them.He will consume the nations, his oppressors,And their bones he will gnaw, and he will shatter them with his arrows. 9 He has crouched down, he has lain down like the lion,And like a lion, who dares rouse him?Those blessing you are blessed,And those cursing you are cursed.”10 Then Baʹlak became furious with Baʹlaam. Baʹlak scornfully clapped his hands together and said to Baʹlaam: “It was to put a curse on my enemies that I called you, but now you have done nothing but bless them these three times. 11 Now go home immediately. I intended to honor you greatly, but look! Jehovah has deprived you of honor.”12 Baʹlaam replied to Baʹlak: “Did I not say to the messengers you sent, 13 ‘If Baʹlak were to give me his house full of silver and gold, I could not of my own will do anything beyond the order of Jehovah, whether good or bad. I will only speak what Jehovah will tell me’? 14 And now I am going away to my people. Come and let me advise you what this people will do to your people in the future.” 15 So he spoke this proverbial saying:“The saying of Baʹlaam the son of Beʹor,And the saying of a man whose eyes have been opened,16 The saying of the one hearing the word of God,And the one having the knowledge of the Most High,A vision of the Almighty he sawWhile bowing down with his eyes uncovered:17 I will see him, but not now;I will behold him, but not soon.A star will come out of Jacob,And a scepter will rise out of Israel.And he will certainly break apart the forehead of MoʹabAnd the skull of all the sons of tumult.18 And Eʹdom will become a possession,Yes, Seʹir the possession of his enemies,While Israel is displaying his courage.19 And out of Jacob one will be subduing,And he will destroy any survivor from the city.”20 When he saw Amʹa·lek, he continued his proverbial saying:“Amʹa·lek was the first of the nations,But in the end he will perish.”21 When he saw the Kenʹites, he continued his proverbial saying:“Secure is your dwelling, and set on the crag is your abode.22 But someone will burn Kaʹin down.How long before As·syrʹi·a carries you away captive?”23 And he continued his proverbial saying:“Woe! Who will survive when God does this?24 Ships will come from the coast of Kitʹtim,And they will afflict As·syrʹi·a,And they will afflict Eʹber.But he too will utterly perish.”25 Then Baʹlaam got up and went and returned to his place. Baʹlak also went his own way.
25 When Israel was dwelling in Shitʹtim, the people started to commit sexual immorality with the daughters of Moʹab. 2 The women invited the people to the sacrifices of their gods, and the people began to eat and to bow down to their gods. 3 So Israel joined in worship of the Baʹal of Peʹor, and Jehovah became enraged with Israel. 4 Jehovah said to Moses: “Take all the leaders of these people and hang them up before Jehovah in broad daylight, that the burning anger of Jehovah may turn back from Israel.” 5 Then Moses said to the judges of Israel: “Each one of you should kill his men who joined in worship of the Baʹal of Peʹor.”6 But just then, there came one of the Israelites bringing near to his brothers a Midʹi·an·ite woman before the eyes of Moses and of all the assembly of the Israelites, while they were weeping at the entrance of the tent of meeting. 7 When Phinʹe·has the son of El·e·aʹzar the son of Aaron the priest saw it, he immediately rose up from the midst of the assembly and took a spear in his hand. 8 Then he went after the man of Israel into the tent and pierced both of them through, the man of Israel and the woman through her genital parts. At that the scourge on the Israelites was halted. 9 Those who died from the scourge amounted to 24,000.10 Then Jehovah said to Moses: 11 “Phinʹe·has the son of El·e·aʹzar the son of Aaron the priest has turned my wrath away from the people of Israel because he tolerated no rivalry at all toward me among them. So I have not exterminated the Israelites in my insistence on exclusive devotion. 12 Therefore, say, ‘I am giving him my covenant of peace. 13 And it will serve as the covenant of a lasting priesthood for him and his offspring after him, because he tolerated no rivalry toward his God and he made atonement for the people of Israel.’”14 Incidentally, the name of the Israelite man who was put to death along with the Midʹi·an·i·tess was Zimʹri the son of Saʹlu, a chieftain of a paternal house of the Simʹe·on·ites. 15 The name of the Midʹi·an·ite woman who was put to death was Cozʹbi the daughter of Zur; he was a leader of the clans of a paternal house in Midʹi·an.16 Jehovah later said to Moses: 17 “Harass the Midʹi·an·ites and strike them down, 18 because they have been harassing you with their cunning dealings against you in the affair of Peʹor and of Cozʹbi the daughter of a chieftain of Midʹi·an, their sister who was put to death in the day of the scourge over the affair of Peʹor.”
26 After the scourge, Jehovah said to Moses and El·e·aʹzar the son of Aaron the priest: 2 “Take a census of the whole assembly of the Israelites from 20 years of age and up, by their paternal houses, counting all those who can serve in the army in Israel.” 3 So Moses and El·e·aʹzar the priest spoke with them in the desert plains of Moʹab by the Jordan at Jerʹi·cho, saying: 4 “Take a census of them from the age of 20 years and up, just as Jehovah commanded Moses.”Now the sons of Israel who went out of the land of Egypt were: 5 Reuʹben, Israel’s firstborn; Reuʹben’s sons were: of Haʹnoch, the family of the Haʹnoch·ites; of Palʹlu, the family of the Palʹlu·ites; 6 of Hezʹron, the family of the Hezʹron·ites; of Carʹmi, the family of the Carʹmites. 7 These were the families of the Reuʹben·ites, and their registered ones amounted to 43,730.8 The son of Palʹlu was E·liʹab. 9 And the sons of E·liʹab were Nemʹu·el, Daʹthan, and A·biʹram. This Daʹthan and A·biʹram were chosen ones of the assembly who fought against Moses and Aaron along with Korʹah’s group when they fought against Jehovah.10 Then the earth opened and swallowed them up. As for Korʹah, he died with his supporters when the fire consumed 250 men. And they became a warning example. 11 However, the sons of Korʹah did not die.12 The sons of Simʹe·on by their families were: of Nemʹu·el, the family of the Nemʹu·el·ites; of Jaʹmin, the family of the Jaʹmin·ites; of Jaʹchin, the family of the Jaʹchin·ites; 13 of Zeʹrah, the family of the Zeʹrah·ites; of Shaʹul, the family of the Sha·uʹlites. 14 These were the families of the Simʹe·on·ites: 22,200.15 The sons of Gad by their families were: of Zeʹphon, the family of the Zeʹphon·ites; of Hagʹgi, the family of the Hagʹgites; of Shuʹni, the family of the Shuʹnites; 16 of Ozʹni, the family of the Ozʹnites; of Eʹri, the family of the Eʹrites; 17 of Arʹod, the family of the Arʹod·ites; of A·reʹli, the family of the A·reʹlites. 18 These were the families of the sons of Gad, and their registered ones were 40,500.19 The sons of Judah were Er and Oʹnan. However, Er and Oʹnan died in the land of Caʹnaan. 20 And the sons of Judah by their families were: of Sheʹlah, the family of the She·laʹnites; of Peʹrez, the family of the Perʹe·zites; of Zeʹrah, the family of the Zeʹrah·ites. 21 And the sons of Peʹrez were: of Hezʹron, the family of the Hezʹron·ites; of Haʹmul, the family of the Ha·muʹlites. 22 These were the families of Judah, and their registered ones were 76,500.23 The sons of Isʹsa·char by their families were: of Toʹla, the family of the Toʹla·ites; of Puʹvah, the family of the Puʹnites; 24 of Jaʹshub, the family of the Jashʹu·bites; of Shimʹron, the family of the Shimʹron·ites. 25 These were the families of Isʹsa·char, and their registered ones were 64,300.26 The sons of Zebʹu·lun by their families were: of Seʹred, the family of the Serʹe·dites; of Eʹlon, the family of the Eʹlon·ites; of Jahʹle·el, the family of the Jahʹle·el·ites. 27 These were the families of the Ze·buʹlu·nites, and their registered ones were 60,500.28 The sons of Joseph by their families were: Ma·nasʹseh and Eʹphra·im. 29 The sons of Ma·nasʹseh were: of Maʹchir, the family of the Maʹchir·ites; and Maʹchir became father to Gilʹe·ad; of Gilʹe·ad, the family of the Gilʹe·ad·ites. 30 These were the sons of Gilʹe·ad: of Ieʹzer, the family of the Ieʹzer·ites; of Heʹlek, the family of the Heʹlek·ites; 31 of Asʹri·el, the family of the Asʹri·el·ites; of Sheʹchem, the family of the Sheʹchem·ites; 32 of She·miʹda, the family of the She·miʹda·ites; of Heʹpher, the family of the Heʹpher·ites. 33 Now Ze·loʹphe·had the son of Heʹpher had no sons, only daughters, and the names of the daughters of Ze·loʹphe·had were Mahʹlah, Noah, Hogʹlah, Milʹcah, and Tirʹzah. 34 These were the families of Ma·nasʹseh, and their registered ones were 52,700.35 These were the sons of Eʹphra·im by their families: of Shuʹthe·lah, the family of the Shuʹthel·aʹhites; of Beʹcher, the family of the Beʹcher·ites; of Taʹhan, the family of the Taʹhan·ites. 36 And these were the sons of Shuʹthe·lah: of Eʹran, the family of the Eʹran·ites. 37 These were the families of the sons of Eʹphra·im, and their registered ones were 32,500. These were the sons of Joseph by their families.38 The sons of Benjamin by their families were: of Beʹla, the family of the Beʹla·ites; of Ashʹbel, the family of the Ashʹbel·ites; of A·hiʹram, the family of the A·hiʹram·ites; 39 of She·phuʹpham, the family of the Shuʹpham·ites; of Huʹpham, the family of the Huʹpham·ites. 40 The sons of Beʹla were Ard and Naʹa·man: of Ard, the family of the Ardʹites; of Naʹa·man, the family of the Naʹa·mites. 41 These were the sons of Benjamin by their families, and their registered ones were 45,600.42 These were the sons of Dan by their families: of Shuʹham, the family of the Shuʹham·ites. These were the families of Dan by their families. 43 All the families of the Shuʹham·ites, of their registered ones, were 64,400.44 The sons of Ashʹer by their families were: of Imʹnah, the family of the Imʹnites; of Ishʹvi, the family of the Ishʹvites; of Be·riʹah, the family of the Be·riʹites; 45 of the sons of Be·riʹah: of Heʹber, the family of the Heʹber·ites; of Malʹchi·el, the family of the Malʹchi·el·ites. 46 The name of Ashʹer’s daughter was Seʹrah. 47 These were the families of the sons of Ashʹer, and their registered ones were 53,400.48 The sons of Naphʹta·li by their families were: of Jahʹze·el, the family of the Jahʹze·el·ites; of Guʹni, the family of the Guʹnites; 49 of Jeʹzer, the family of the Jeʹzer·ites; of Shilʹlem, the family of the Shilʹlem·ites. 50 These were the families of Naphʹta·li by their families, and their registered ones were 45,400.51 This is the total of those registered of the Israelites: 601,730.52 After that Jehovah said to Moses: 53 “Among these the land should be divided as an inheritance according to the list of the names. 54 For the larger groups, you should increase the inheritance, and for the smaller groups, you should reduce the inheritance. Each group’s inheritance should be given in proportion to the number of those registered. 55 However, the land should be apportioned by lot. They should receive their inheritance according to the names of the tribes of their fathers. 56 Each inheritance will be determined by lot and apportioned among the larger and the smaller groups.”57 Now these were the registered ones of the Levites by their families: of Gerʹshon, the family of the Gerʹshon·ites; of Koʹhath, the family of the Koʹhath·ites; of Me·rarʹi, the family of the Me·rarʹites. 58 These were the families of the Levites: the family of the Libʹnites, the family of the Hebʹron·ites, the family of the Mahʹlites, the family of the Muʹshites, the family of the Korʹah·ites.Koʹhath became father to Amʹram. 59 And the name of Amʹram’s wife was Jochʹe·bed, Leʹvi’s daughter, whom his wife bore to Leʹvi in Egypt. And to Amʹram she bore Aaron and Moses and their sister Mirʹi·am. 60 Then to Aaron there were born Naʹdab, A·biʹhu, El·e·aʹzar, and Ithʹa·mar. 61 But Naʹdab and A·biʹhu died for presenting unauthorized fire before Jehovah.62 The total of those registered was 23,000, all males from a month old and up. For they were not registered among the Israelites, because no inheritance was to be given to them among the Israelites.63 These were the ones registered by Moses and El·e·aʹzar the priest when they registered the Israelites in the desert plains of Moʹab by the Jordan at Jerʹi·cho. 64 But among them there was no one who had been registered by Moses and Aaron the priest in the census of the Israelites taken in the wilderness of Siʹnai. 65 For Jehovah had said concerning them: “They will die without fail in the wilderness.” So there was not a man left of them except Caʹleb the son of Je·phunʹneh and Joshua the son of Nun.
27 Then the daughters of Ze·loʹphe·had, the son of Heʹpher, the son of Gilʹe·ad, the son of Maʹchir, the son of Ma·nasʹseh, of the families of Ma·nasʹseh the son of Joseph, approached. The names of his daughters were Mahʹlah, Noah, Hogʹlah, Milʹcah, and Tirʹzah. 2 They stood before Moses, El·e·aʹzar the priest, the chieftains, and all the assembly at the entrance of the tent of meeting and said: 3 “Our father died in the wilderness, but he was not among the group who banded together against Jehovah, the supporters of Korʹah, but he died for his own sin and he did not have any sons. 4 Why should the name of our father be lost from his family because he had no son? Give us a possession among our father’s brothers.” 5 So Moses presented their case before Jehovah.6 Jehovah then said this to Moses: 7 “The daughters of Ze·loʹphe·had are correct. You should by all means give them the possession as an inheritance among their father’s brothers and transfer their father’s inheritance to them. 8 And tell the Israelites, ‘If a man dies without having a son, you must then cause his inheritance to pass to his daughter. 9 And if he has no daughter, you will give his inheritance to his brothers. 10 And if he has no brothers, you will give his inheritance to his father’s brothers. 11 And if his father has no brothers, you will give his inheritance to the closest blood relative in his family, and he will take possession of it. This will serve as a statute by judicial decision for the Israelites, just as Jehovah has commanded Moses.’”12 Then Jehovah said to Moses: “Go up into this mountain of Abʹa·rim, and view the land that I will give the Israelites. 13 When you have seen it, you will also be gathered to your people, just as Aaron your brother was, 14 because when the assembly was quarreling with me in the wilderness of Zin, you rebelled against my order to sanctify me before them by means of the waters. These are the waters of Merʹi·bah at Kaʹdesh in the wilderness of Zin.”15 Then Moses said to Jehovah: 16 “Let Jehovah, the God of the spirit of all people, appoint over the assembly a man 17 who will go out and come in before them and who will lead them out and bring them in, so that Jehovah’s assembly may not become like sheep that have no shepherd.” 18 So Jehovah said to Moses: “Take Joshua the son of Nun, a man in whom there is spirit, and lay your hand on him. 19 Then stand him before El·e·aʹzar the priest and before all the assembly, and you must commission him before their eyes. 20 You are to confer some of your authority on him, so that all the assembly of the Israelites may listen to him. 21 He will stand before El·e·aʹzar the priest, who will inquire in his behalf by the judgment of the Uʹrim before Jehovah. At his order they will go out and at his order they will come in, he and all the Israelites with him and all the assembly.”22 So Moses did just as Jehovah had commanded him. He took Joshua and stood him before El·e·aʹzar the priest and before all the assembly, 23 and he laid his hands on him and commissioned him, just as Jehovah had spoken through Moses.
28 Jehovah next said to Moses: 2 “Command the Israelites and tell them, ‘You should take care that you present to me my offering, my bread. My offerings by fire as a pleasing aroma to me must be made at their appointed times.’3 “And say to them, ‘This is the offering made by fire that you will present to Jehovah: two sound year-old male lambs a day as a burnt offering regularly. 4 The one male lamb you will offer in the morning, and the other male lamb you will offer at twilight, 5 together with a tenth of an eʹphah of fine flour mixed with a fourth of a hin of beaten oil as a grain offering. 6 It is a regular burnt offering, which was established at Mount Siʹnai as a pleasing aroma, an offering made by fire to Jehovah, 7 along with its drink offering, a fourth of a hin for each male lamb. Pour out the alcoholic drink in the holy place as a drink offering to Jehovah. 8 And you will offer the other male lamb at twilight. With the same grain offering as that made in the morning and with its same drink offering, you will present it as an offering made by fire as a pleasing aroma to Jehovah.9 “‘However, on the Sabbath day, the offering should be two sound year-old male lambs and two tenths of an eʹphah measure of fine flour mixed with oil as a grain offering, together with its drink offering. 10 This is the burnt offering for the Sabbath, along with the regular burnt offering and its drink offering.11 “‘At the start of each month you will present as a burnt offering to Jehovah two young bulls, one ram, and seven sound male lambs each a year old, 12 and three tenth measures of fine flour mixed with oil as a grain offering for each bull and two tenth measures of fine flour mixed with oil as a grain offering for the one ram, 13 and a tenth measure of fine flour mixed with oil as a grain offering for each male lamb, as a burnt offering, a pleasing aroma, an offering made by fire to Jehovah. 14 And their drink offerings should be half a hin of wine for a bull and a third of a hin for the ram and a fourth of a hin for a male lamb. This is the monthly burnt offering each month throughout the year. 15 Also, one young goat should be offered as a sin offering to Jehovah in addition to the regular burnt offering together with its drink offering.16 “‘In the first month, on the 14th day of the month, will be Jehovah’s Passover. 17 And on the 15th day of this month, there will be a festival. Unleavened bread will be eaten for seven days. 18 On the first day there will be a holy convention. You must not do any hard work. 19 And you will present as a burnt offering made by fire to Jehovah two young bulls, one ram, and seven male lambs each a year old. You should offer sound animals. 20 You should offer them with their grain offerings of fine flour mixed with oil, three tenth measures for a bull and two tenth measures for the ram. 21 You will offer a tenth measure respectively for each male lamb of the seven male lambs, 22 as well as one goat as a sin offering to make atonement for you. 23 Aside from the morning burnt offering, which is for the regular burnt offering, you will offer these. 24 You will offer these in the same manner each day for seven days as food, an offering made by fire as a pleasing aroma to Jehovah. It should be offered along with the regular burnt offering and its drink offering. 25 On the seventh day you should hold a holy convention. You must not do any hard work.26 “‘On the day of the first ripe fruits, when you present a new grain offering to Jehovah, you should hold a holy convention in your feast of weeks. You must not do any hard work. 27 You will present as a burnt offering for a pleasing aroma to Jehovah two young bulls, one ram, and seven male lambs each a year old, 28 and as their grain offering of fine flour mixed with oil, three tenth measures for each bull, two tenth measures for the one ram, 29 a tenth measure respectively for each male lamb of the seven male lambs, 30 as well as one young goat to make atonement for you. 31 You will offer them in addition to the regular burnt offering and its grain offering. They should be sound animals, along with their drink offerings.
29 “‘And in the seventh month, on the first of the month, you should hold a holy convention. You must not do any hard work. It is a day on which you should sound the trumpet. 2 You will offer as a burnt offering for a pleasing aroma to Jehovah one young bull, one ram, and seven male lambs each a year old, all of them sound, 3 and their grain offering of fine flour mixed with oil, three tenths of an eʹphah measure for the bull, two tenth measures for the ram, 4 and one tenth measure for each male lamb of the seven male lambs, 5 and one young male goat as a sin offering to make atonement for you. 6 This is in addition to the monthly burnt offering and its grain offering and the regular burnt offering and its grain offering, together with their drink offerings, according to the regular procedure for them, as a pleasing aroma, an offering made by fire to Jehovah.7 “‘And on the tenth of this seventh month, you should hold a holy convention, and you must afflict yourselves. You must not do any work. 8 And you will present as a burnt offering to Jehovah, as a pleasing aroma, one young bull, one ram, and seven male lambs each a year old, all of them sound. 9 And as their grain offering of fine flour mixed with oil, three tenth measures for the bull, two tenth measures for the one ram, 10 a tenth measure respectively for each male lamb of the seven male lambs, 11 as well as one young goat as a sin offering, aside from the sin offering of atonement and the regular burnt offering and its grain offering, together with their drink offerings.12 “‘And on the 15th day of the seventh month, you should hold a holy convention. You must not do any hard work, and you must celebrate a festival to Jehovah seven days. 13 And you will present as a burnt offering, an offering made by fire as a pleasing aroma to Jehovah, 13 young bulls, 2 rams, and 14 male lambs each a year old, all of them sound. 14 And as their grain offering of fine flour mixed with oil, three tenth measures for each bull of the 13 bulls, two tenth measures for each ram of the 2 rams, 15 and a tenth measure for each male lamb of the 14 male lambs, 16 as well as one young goat as a sin offering, aside from the regular burnt offering, its grain offering, and its drink offering.17 “‘And on the second day, 12 young bulls, 2 rams, and 14 male lambs each a year old, all of them sound, 18 and their grain offering and their drink offerings for the bulls, the rams, and the male lambs by their number according to the regular procedure, 19 as well as one young goat as a sin offering, aside from the regular burnt offering and its grain offering, together with their drink offerings.20 “‘And on the third day, 11 bulls, 2 rams, and 14 male lambs each a year old, all of them sound, 21 and their grain offering and their drink offerings for the bulls, the rams, and the male lambs by their number according to the regular procedure, 22 as well as one goat as a sin offering, aside from the regular burnt offering and its grain offering and its drink offering.23 “‘And on the fourth day, 10 bulls, 2 rams, and 14 male lambs each a year old, all of them sound, 24 their grain offering and their drink offerings for the bulls, the rams, and the male lambs by their number according to the regular procedure, 25 as well as one young goat as a sin offering, aside from the regular burnt offering, its grain offering, and its drink offering.26 “‘And on the fifth day, 9 bulls, 2 rams, and 14 male lambs each a year old, all of them sound, 27 and their grain offering and their drink offerings for the bulls, the rams, and the male lambs by their number according to the regular procedure, 28 as well as one goat as a sin offering, aside from the regular burnt offering and its grain offering and its drink offering.29 “‘And on the sixth day, 8 bulls, 2 rams, and 14 male lambs each a year old, all of them sound, 30 and their grain offering and their drink offerings for the bulls, the rams, and the male lambs by their number according to the regular procedure, 31 as well as one goat as a sin offering, aside from the regular burnt offering, its grain offering, and its drink offerings.32 “‘And on the seventh day, 7 bulls, 2 rams, and 14 male lambs each a year old, all of them sound, 33 and their grain offering and their drink offerings for the bulls, the rams, and the male lambs by their number according to the regular procedure for them, 34 as well as one goat as a sin offering, aside from the regular burnt offering, its grain offering, and its drink offering.35 “‘On the eighth day, you should hold a solemn assembly. You should not do any hard work. 36 You will present as a burnt offering, an offering made by fire as a pleasing aroma to Jehovah, one bull, one ram, and seven male lambs each a year old, all of them sound, 37 and their grain offering and their drink offerings for the bull, the ram, and the male lambs by their number according to the regular procedure, 38 as well as one goat as a sin offering, aside from the regular burnt offering and its grain offering and its drink offering.39 “‘These you will offer to Jehovah at your seasonal festivals, in addition to your vow offerings and your voluntary offerings as your burnt offerings and your grain offerings and your drink offerings and your communion sacrifices.’” 40 Moses told the Israelites everything that Jehovah had commanded him.
3 Now these were the family lines of Aaron and Moses in the day that Jehovah spoke with Moses on Mount Siʹnai. 2 These were the names of Aaron’s sons: the firstborn Naʹdab, and A·biʹhu, El·e·aʹzar, and Ithʹa·mar. 3 These were the names of Aaron’s sons, the anointed priests who had been installed to serve as priests. 4 However, Naʹdab and A·biʹhu died before Jehovah when they offered unauthorized fire before Jehovah in the wilderness of Siʹnai, and they did not have any sons. But El·e·aʹzar and Ithʹa·mar continued to serve as priests along with Aaron their father.5 Jehovah then said to Moses: 6 “Bring the tribe of Leʹvi forward, and stand them before Aaron the priest, and they will minister to him. 7 They are to fulfill their responsibilities toward him and toward all the assembly before the tent of meeting by carrying out their service in connection with the tabernacle. 8 They are to take care of all the utensils of the tent of meeting and to carry out their responsibilities toward the Israelites by taking care of the services related to the tabernacle. 9 You are to give the Levites to Aaron and his sons. They are given ones, given to him from the Israelites. 10 You should appoint Aaron and his sons, and they are to carry out their priestly duties, and any unauthorized person who comes near should be put to death.”11 Jehovah continued to speak to Moses, saying: 12 “As for me, look! I take the Levites from among the Israelites in place of all the firstborn of the Israelites, and the Levites will become mine. 13 For every firstborn is mine. In the day that I struck every firstborn in the land of Egypt, I sanctified to myself every firstborn in Israel from man to beast. They are to become mine. I am Jehovah.”14 Jehovah spoke further to Moses in the wilderness of Siʹnai, saying: 15 “Register the sons of Leʹvi by their paternal houses and by their families. You should register every male from a month old and up.” 16 So Moses registered them at the order of Jehovah, just as he had been commanded. 17 These were the names of the sons of Leʹvi: Gerʹshon, Koʹhath, and Me·rarʹi.18 Now these were the names of the sons of Gerʹshon by their families: Libʹni and Shimʹe·i.19 The sons of Koʹhath by their families were Amʹram, Izʹhar, Hebʹron, and Uzʹzi·el.20 The sons of Me·rarʹi by their families were Mahʹli and Muʹshi.These were the families of the Levites by their paternal houses.21 From Gerʹshon came the family of the Libʹnites and the family of the Shimʹe·ites. These were the families of the Gerʹshon·ites. 22 The number of all their males a month old and up who were registered was 7,500. 23 The families of the Gerʹshon·ites were encamped behind the tabernacle toward the west. 24 The chieftain of the paternal house of the Gerʹshon·ites was E·liʹa·saph the son of Laʹel. 25 The responsibility of the sons of Gerʹshon in the tent of meeting was to care for the tabernacle and the tent, its covering, the screen of the entrance of the tent of meeting, 26 the hanging curtains of the courtyard, the screen of the entrance of the courtyard that surrounds the tabernacle and the altar, its tent cords, and all the service connected with these.27 From Koʹhath came the family of the Amʹram·ites, the family of the Izʹhar·ites, the family of the Hebʹron·ites, and the family of the Uz·ziʹel·ites. These were the families of the Koʹhath·ites. 28 The number of all the males from a month old and up was 8,600; they were responsible for taking care of the holy place. 29 The families of the sons of Koʹhath camped on the south side of the tabernacle. 30 The chieftain of the paternal house of the families of the Koʹhath·ites was E·li·zaʹphan the son of Uzʹzi·el. 31 Their responsibility was to care for the Ark, the table, the lampstand, the altars, the utensils used to minister in the holy place, the screen, and all the service connected with these.32 The head chieftain of the Levites was El·e·aʹzar the son of Aaron the priest, who had the oversight of those taking care of the responsibilities of the holy place.33 From Me·rarʹi came the family of the Mahʹlites and the family of the Muʹshites. These were the families of Me·rarʹi. 34 The number of all the males from a month old and up who were registered was 6,200. 35 The chieftain of the paternal house of the families of Me·rarʹi was Zuʹri·el the son of Abʹi·ha·il. They were encamped on the north side of the tabernacle. 36 The sons of Me·rarʹi were responsible for overseeing the panel frames of the tabernacle, its bars, its pillars, its socket pedestals, all its utensils, and all the service connected with these, 37 as well as the pillars that were all around the courtyard and their socket pedestals, their tent pins, and their tent cords.38 Those camping in front of the tabernacle toward the east, before the tent of meeting toward the sunrise, were Moses and Aaron and his sons. They were responsible for taking care of the sanctuary as their obligation in behalf of the Israelites. Any unauthorized person coming near would be put to death.39 All the Levite males from a month old and up, whom Moses and Aaron registered by their families at the order of Jehovah, were 22,000.40 Then Jehovah said to Moses: “Register all the firstborn males of the Israelites from a month old and up, count them, and make a list of their names. 41 You must take the Levites for me—I am Jehovah—in place of all the firstborn of the Israelites, and take the domestic animals of the Levites in place of all the firstborn of the domestic animals of the Israelites.” 42 Moses then registered all the firstborn among the Israelites, just as Jehovah had commanded him. 43 The number of all the firstborn males who were registered by name from a month old and up was 22,273.44 Jehovah continued to speak to Moses, saying: 45 “Take the Levites in place of all the firstborn among the Israelites, and take the domestic animals of the Levites in place of their domestic animals, and the Levites must become mine. I am Jehovah. 46 As the ransom price of the 273 of the firstborn of the Israelites who are in excess of the Levites, 47 you are to take five shekels for each individual, according to the standard shekel of the holy place. A shekel is 20 geʹrahs. 48 You are to give the money to Aaron and his sons as the ransom price of those who are in excess of them.” 49 So Moses took the money of the redemption price from those who were in excess of the ransom price of the Levites. 50 He took the money from the firstborn of the Israelites, 1,365 shekels, according to the standard shekel of the holy place. 51 Then Moses gave the money of the ransom price to Aaron and his sons according to the word of Jehovah, just as Jehovah had commanded Moses.
30 Then Moses spoke to the heads of the tribes of Israel, saying: “This is the word that Jehovah has commanded: 2 If a man makes a vow to Jehovah or swears an oath to impose on himself a vow of abstinence, he must not violate his word. He should do everything he vowed he would do.3 “And if a woman makes a vow to Jehovah or she imposes a vow of abstinence on herself when she is young and living in the house of her father 4 and her father hears her vow or her abstinence vow that she has imposed on herself and her father offers no objection, all her vows will stand, and every abstinence vow that she has imposed on herself will stand. 5 But if her father forbids her when he hears that she has imposed vows or abstinence vows on herself, it will not stand. Jehovah will forgive her because her father forbade her.6 “However, if she should marry a husband while under her vow or the rash promise that she has imposed on herself 7 and her husband hears of it and offers no objection on the day he hears of it, her vows or her abstinence vows that she has imposed on herself will stand. 8 But if her husband forbids her on the day he hears of it, he may annul the vow or the rash promise that she imposed on herself, and Jehovah will forgive her.9 “But if a widow or a divorced woman makes a vow, everything that she has imposed on herself will be binding on her.10 “However, if a woman imposed the vow or the abstinence vow on herself while in the house of her husband 11 and her husband heard it and has not objected or disapproved, all her vows or any abstinence vow that she imposed on herself will stand. 12 But if on the day he heard them her husband completely annulled whatever vows or abstinence vow she swore to, they will not stand. Her husband annulled them, and Jehovah will forgive her. 13 Regarding any vow or any oath involving an abstinence vow to practice self-denial, her husband should establish it or her husband should annul it. 14 But if her husband offers no objection at all from day to day, he also establishes all her vows or all her abstinence vows that are upon her. He establishes them because he did not object on the day he heard her make them. 15 But if he annuls them later, sometime after the day he heard them, he will bear the consequences of her guilt.16 “These are the regulations that Jehovah commanded Moses relating to a husband and his wife, and relating to a father and his young daughter living in his house.”
31 Jehovah then told Moses: 2 “Take vengeance for the Israelites on the Midʹi·an·ites. Afterward you will be gathered to your people.”3 So Moses spoke to the people, saying: “Equip men from among you for battle against Midʹi·an and to execute Jehovah’s vengeance on Midʹi·an. 4 You should send 1,000 of each tribe of all the tribes of Israel into the army.” 5 So from the thousands of Israel, 1,000 were assigned from each tribe, 12,000 equipped for battle.6 Then Moses sent them out, 1,000 from each tribe to the army, along with Phinʹe·has the son of El·e·aʹzar the priest for the army, who had the holy utensils and the signal trumpets in his hand. 7 They waged war against Midʹi·an, just as Jehovah had commanded Moses, and they killed every male. 8 Along with the others slain, they killed the kings of Midʹi·an, namely, Eʹvi, Reʹkem, Zur, Hur, and Reʹba, the five kings of Midʹi·an. They also killed Baʹlaam the son of Beʹor with the sword. 9 But the Israelites carried off captive the women and children of Midʹi·an. They also plundered all their domestic animals, all their livestock, and all their possessions. 10 And all their cities in which they had settled and all their encampments they burned with fire. 11 And they took all the spoil and all the plunder, both humans and animals. 12 Then they brought the captives, the plunder, and the spoil to Moses and El·e·aʹzar the priest and to the assembly of the Israelites, to the camp in the desert plains of Moʹab near the Jordan at Jerʹi·cho.13 Then Moses and El·e·aʹzar the priest and all the chieftains of the assembly went out to meet them outside the camp. 14 But Moses grew indignant at the appointed men of the combat forces, the chiefs of the thousands and the chiefs of the hundreds who were coming in from the military expedition. 15 Moses said to them: “Have you preserved all the females alive? 16 Look! They are the ones who by Baʹlaam’s word induced the Israelites to commit unfaithfulness toward Jehovah over the affair of Peʹor, so that the scourge came upon the assembly of Jehovah. 17 Now you should kill every male among the children and kill every woman who has had sexual relations with a man. 18 But you may keep alive all the young girls who have not had sexual relations with a man. 19 And you should camp outside the camp seven days. Every one of you who has killed someone and every one of you who has touched someone slain should purify himself on the third day and on the seventh day, you and your captives. 20 And you should purify from sin every garment, every article of skin, everything made of goat hair, and every article of wood.”21 El·e·aʹzar the priest then said to the men of the army who had gone into the battle: “This is the statute of the law that Jehovah commanded Moses, 22 ‘Only the gold, the silver, the copper, the iron, the tin, and the lead, 23 everything that can be processed with fire, you should pass through the fire, and it will be clean. However, it should also be purified by the water for cleansing. Everything that cannot be processed with fire, you should pass through the water. 24 And you should wash your garments on the seventh day and be clean, and then you may come into the camp.’”25 Jehovah then said this to Moses: 26 “Take an inventory of the plunder, counting the captives both of humans and animals; do this together with El·e·aʹzar the priest and the heads of the paternal houses of the assembly. 27 Divide what was plundered into two parts to be shared between those in the army who took part in the battle and all the rest of the assembly. 28 As a tax for Jehovah, you should take from the soldiers who went out into the battle one soul out of every 500, of the people, the herd, the donkeys, and the flock. 29 You should take it from their half and give it to El·e·aʹzar the priest as Jehovah’s contribution. 30 From the half given to the Israelites, you should take one out of 50, of the people, the herd, the donkeys, the flock, and every sort of domestic animal, and give them to the Levites, who care for the responsibilities connected with Jehovah’s tabernacle.”31 So Moses and El·e·aʹzar the priest did just as Jehovah had commanded Moses. 32 The spoils, the rest of the plunder that the people of the expedition had taken, amounted to 675,000 of the flock, 33 72,000 of the herd, 34 and 61,000 donkeys. 35 The women who had not had sexual relations with a man amounted to 32,000 women. 36 The half that was the share of those who went out into the battle amounted to 337,500 of the flock. 37 The tax for Jehovah from the flock amounted to 675. 38 And there were 36,000 of the herd, and the tax on them for Jehovah was 72. 39 And there were 30,500 donkeys, and the tax on them for Jehovah was 61. 40 And there were 16,000 humans, and the tax on them for Jehovah was 32 persons. 41 Then Moses gave the tax as Jehovah’s contribution to El·e·aʹzar the priest, just as Jehovah had commanded Moses.42 From the half belonging to the Israelites, which Moses had divided off from the portion that belonged to the men who waged war, 43 that half of the flock amounted to 337,500, 44 and of the herd, 36,000, 45 and of the donkeys, 30,500, 46 and of the people, 16,000. 47 Then Moses took from the half belonging to the Israelites one out of 50, of the people and of the animals, and gave them to the Levites, who cared for the responsibility of Jehovah’s tabernacle, just as Jehovah had commanded Moses.48 Then the appointed men who were of the thousands of the army, the chiefs of the thousands and the chiefs of the hundreds, approached Moses, 49 and they said to Moses: “Your servants have taken the count of the men of war who are under our command, and not one has been reported missing from us. 50 So let us each present what he has found as Jehovah’s offering, articles of gold, ankle chains, bracelets, signet rings, earrings, and other jewelry, in order to make atonement for ourselves before Jehovah.”51 So Moses and El·e·aʹzar the priest accepted the gold from them, all the jewelry. 52 All the gold of the contribution that they made to Jehovah amounted to 16,750 shekels, from the chiefs of the thousands and the chiefs of the hundreds. 53 The men of the army had each taken plunder for himself. 54 Moses and El·e·aʹzar the priest accepted the gold from the chiefs of the thousands and of the hundreds and brought it into the tent of meeting as a reminder for the people of Israel before Jehovah.
32 Now the sons of Reuʹben and the sons of Gad had very large quantities of livestock, and they saw that the lands of Jaʹzer and Gilʹe·ad were a good region for livestock. 2 So the sons of Gad and the sons of Reuʹben approached Moses, El·e·aʹzar the priest, and the chieftains of the assembly and said: 3 “Atʹa·roth, Diʹbon, Jaʹzer, Nimʹrah, Heshʹbon, E·le·aʹleh, Seʹbam, Neʹbo, and Beʹon, 4 the land that Jehovah defeated before the assembly of Israel, is a good land for livestock, and your servants have much livestock.” 5 They continued: “If we have found favor in your eyes, let this be the land given to your servants as a possession. Do not make us cross the Jordan.”6 Then Moses said to the sons of Gad and the sons of Reuʹben: “Are your brothers to go to war while you yourselves keep dwelling here? 7 Why should you discourage the people of Israel from crossing into the land that Jehovah is certain to give them? 8 That is what your fathers did when I sent them from Kaʹdesh-barʹne·a to see the land. 9 When they went up to the Valley of Eshʹcol and saw the land, they discouraged the people of Israel from going into the land that Jehovah was to give them. 10 Jehovah’s anger blazed on that day so that he swore: 11 ‘The men who came up out of Egypt from 20 years old and up will not see the land of which I have sworn to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, because they have not followed me wholeheartedly— 12 except Caʹleb the son of Je·phunʹneh the Kenʹiz·zite and Joshua the son of Nun, because they have followed Jehovah wholeheartedly.’ 13 So Jehovah’s anger blazed against Israel and he made them wander about in the wilderness for 40 years, until all the generation that was doing evil in the eyes of Jehovah came to its end. 14 Now here you have risen in the place of your fathers as a brood of sinful men who increase the burning anger of Jehovah against Israel. 15 If you turn back from following him, he will certainly leave them again in the wilderness, and you will bring ruin to all this people.”16 They later approached him and said: “Let us build here stone pens for our livestock and cities for our children. 17 But we will continue ready for battle and will go before the Israelites until we have brought them to their place, while our children will dwell in the fortified cities, safe from the inhabitants of the land. 18 We will not return to our houses until each of the Israelites has received his land as an inheritance. 19 For we will not receive an inheritance with them on the other side of the Jordan and beyond, because we have received our inheritance on the east side of the Jordan.”20 Moses replied to them: “If you will do this: Take up arms before Jehovah for the war; 21 and if every one of you takes up arms and crosses the Jordan before Jehovah as he drives away his enemies from before him 22 until the land is subdued before Jehovah, afterward you may return and be free from guilt before Jehovah and Israel. Then this land will become your possession before Jehovah. 23 But if you do not do this, you will have sinned against Jehovah. In that case, know that your sin will catch up with you. 24 So you may build cities for your children and pens for your flocks, but you must do what you have promised.”25 The sons of Gad and the sons of Reuʹben said this to Moses: “Your servants will do just as my lord is commanding. 26 Our children, our wives, our livestock, and all our domestic animals will stay there in the cities of Gilʹe·ad, 27 but your servants will cross over, every man armed for battle to wage war before Jehovah, just as my lord is speaking.”28 So Moses gave a command concerning them to El·e·aʹzar the priest, to Joshua the son of Nun, and to the heads of the paternal houses of the tribes of Israel. 29 Moses said to them: “If the sons of Gad and the sons of Reuʹben cross over the Jordan with you, every man armed for the war before Jehovah, and the land is subdued before you, you will then give them the land of Gilʹe·ad as a possession. 30 But if they do not take up arms and cross over with you, they will then settle among you in the land of Caʹnaan.”31 To this the sons of Gad and the sons of Reuʹben answered: “What Jehovah has spoken to your servants is what we will do. 32 We will take up arms and cross over before Jehovah to the land of Caʹnaan, but the possession we are to inherit will be on this side of the Jordan.” 33 So Moses gave to them—to the sons of Gad, the sons of Reuʹben, and to the half tribe of Ma·nasʹseh the son of Joseph—the kingdom of Siʹhon the king of the Amʹor·ites and the kingdom of Og the king of Baʹshan, the land belonging to its cities in those territories, and the cities of the surrounding land.34 And the sons of Gad built Diʹbon, Atʹa·roth, A·roʹer, 35 Atʹroth-shoʹphan, Jaʹzer, Jogʹbe·hah, 36 Beth-nimʹrah, and Beth-haʹran, fortified cities, and they built stone pens for the flocks. 37 And the sons of Reuʹben built Heshʹbon, E·le·aʹleh, Kir·i·a·thaʹim, 38 Neʹbo, and Baʹal-meʹon—their names being changed—and Sibʹmah; and they began to rename the cities that they rebuilt.39 The sons of Maʹchir the son of Ma·nasʹseh marched against Gilʹe·ad and captured it and drove away the Amʹor·ites who were in it. 40 So Moses gave Gilʹe·ad to Maʹchir the son of Ma·nasʹseh, and he began dwelling in it. 41 And Jaʹir the son of Ma·nasʹseh marched against them and captured their tent villages, and he began to call them Havʹvoth-jaʹir. 42 And Noʹbah marched against and captured Keʹnath and its dependent towns, and he began to call it Noʹbah by his own name.
33 These were the stages of the journey of the people of Israel when they went out of the land of Egypt by their companies under the direction of Moses and Aaron. 2 Moses kept recording the departure places by the stages of their journey at the order of Jehovah, and these were their stages from one departure place to another: 3 They departed from Ramʹe·ses in the first month, on the 15th day of the month. On the very day after the Passover, the Israelites went out with confidence before the eyes of all the Egyptians. 4 Meanwhile, the Egyptians were burying all the firstborn whom Jehovah had struck down among them, for Jehovah had executed judgments on their gods.5 So the Israelites departed from Ramʹe·ses and camped at Sucʹcoth. 6 Then they departed from Sucʹcoth and camped at Eʹtham, which is on the edge of the wilderness. 7 Next they departed from Eʹtham and turned back toward Pi·ha·hiʹroth, which is in view of Baʹal-zeʹphon, and they camped before Migʹdol. 8 After that they departed from Pi·ha·hiʹroth and passed through the midst of the sea to the wilderness and kept marching a three-day journey in the wilderness of Eʹtham and camped at Maʹrah.9 Then they departed from Maʹrah and came to Eʹlim. Now in Eʹlim there were 12 springs of water and 70 palm trees, so they camped there. 10 Next they departed from Eʹlim and camped by the Red Sea. 11 After that they departed from the Red Sea and camped in the wilderness of Sin. 12 Then they departed from the wilderness of Sin and camped at Dophʹkah. 13 Later they departed from Dophʹkah and camped at Aʹlush. 14 They next departed from Aʹlush and camped at Rephʹi·dim, where there was no water for the people to drink. 15 After that they departed from Rephʹi·dim and camped in the wilderness of Siʹnai.16 They departed from the wilderness of Siʹnai and camped at Kibʹroth-hat·taʹa·vah. 17 Then they departed from Kibʹroth-hat·taʹa·vah and camped at Ha·zeʹroth. 18 After that they departed from Ha·zeʹroth and camped at Rithʹmah. 19 Next they departed from Rithʹmah and camped at Rimʹmon-peʹrez. 20 Then they departed from Rimʹmon-peʹrez and camped at Libʹnah. 21 They departed from Libʹnah and camped at Risʹsah. 22 Next they departed from Risʹsah and camped at Ke·he·laʹthah. 23 Then they departed from Ke·he·laʹthah and camped at Mount Sheʹpher.24 After that they departed from Mount Sheʹpher and camped at Har·aʹdah. 25 Then they departed from Har·aʹdah and camped at Mak·heʹloth. 26 Next they departed from Mak·heʹloth and camped at Taʹhath. 27 After that they departed from Taʹhath and camped at Teʹrah. 28 Then they departed from Teʹrah and camped at Mithʹkah. 29 Later they departed from Mithʹkah and camped at Hash·moʹnah. 30 Next they departed from Hash·moʹnah and camped at Mo·seʹroth. 31 Then they departed from Mo·seʹroth and camped at Benʹe-jaʹa·kan. 32 And they departed from Benʹe-jaʹa·kan and camped at Hor-hag·gidʹgad. 33 Next they departed from Hor-hag·gidʹgad and camped at Jotʹba·thah. 34 Later they departed from Jotʹba·thah and camped at A·broʹnah. 35 Then they departed from A·broʹnah and camped at Eʹzi·on-geʹber. 36 After that they departed from Eʹzi·on-geʹber and camped in the wilderness of Zin, that is, Kaʹdesh.37 Later they departed from Kaʹdesh and camped at Mount Hor, on the frontier of the land of Eʹdom. 38 And Aaron the priest went up into Mount Hor at the order of Jehovah and died there in the 40th year after the Israelites left the land of Egypt, in the fifth month, on the first of the month. 39 Aaron was 123 years old at his death on Mount Hor.40 Now the king of Aʹrad, the Caʹnaan·ite who was dwelling in the Negʹeb in the land of Caʹnaan, heard about the coming of the Israelites.41 In time they departed from Mount Hor and camped at Zal·moʹnah. 42 After that they departed from Zal·moʹnah and camped at Puʹnon. 43 Next they departed from Puʹnon and camped at Oʹboth. 44 Then they departed from Oʹboth and camped at Iʹye-abʹa·rim, on the border of Moʹab. 45 Later they departed from Iʹyim and camped at Diʹbon-gad. 46 After that they departed from Diʹbon-gad and camped at Alʹmon-dib·la·thaʹim. 47 Then they departed from Alʹmon-dib·la·thaʹim and camped in the mountains of Abʹa·rim before Neʹbo. 48 Finally they departed from the mountains of Abʹa·rim and camped on the desert plains of Moʹab by the Jordan at Jerʹi·cho. 49 They continued camping along the Jordan, from Beth-jeshʹi·moth as far as Aʹbel-shitʹtim, on the desert plains of Moʹab.50 Jehovah spoke to Moses on the desert plains of Moʹab by the Jordan at Jerʹi·cho, saying: 51 “Speak to the Israelites and tell them, ‘You are crossing the Jordan into the land of Caʹnaan. 52 You must drive away all the inhabitants of the land from before you and destroy all their carvings of stone and all their metal statues, and you should demolish all their sacred high places. 53 And you will take possession of the land and dwell in it, because I will certainly give you the land as a possession. 54 You must apportion the land by lot as a possession among your families. To the larger group you should increase his inheritance, and to the smaller group you should reduce his inheritance. Everyone’s inheritance will be where his lot falls. You will receive your property as an inheritance by the tribes of your fathers.55 “‘If, though, you do not drive the inhabitants of the land away from before you, those whom you allow to remain will be as irritants in your eyes and thorns in your sides, and they will harass you in the land where you will dwell. 56 And I will do to you what I intended to do to them.’”
34 And Jehovah spoke further to Moses, saying: 2 “Give these instructions to the Israelites: ‘When you go into the land of Caʹnaan, this is the land that will fall to you as an inheritance, the land of Caʹnaan according to its boundaries.3 “‘Your southern border will extend from the wilderness of Zin alongside Eʹdom, and your south boundary on the east will be from the extremity of the Salt Sea. 4 Your boundary will change direction to pass south of the ascent of A·krabʹbim and continue to Zin, and its end will be south of Kaʹdesh-barʹne·a. Then it will extend to Haʹzar-adʹdar and continue to Azʹmon. 5 The boundary will change direction at Azʹmon to the Wadi of Egypt, and its end will be at the Sea.6 “‘Your western boundary will be the Great Sea and the coast. This will become your western boundary.7 “‘Now this will be your northern boundary: From the Great Sea you will mark your boundary out to Mount Hor. 8 From Mount Hor you will mark out the boundary to Leʹbo-haʹmath, and the end of the boundary will be at Zeʹdad. 9 And the boundary will extend to Ziphʹron, and its end will be Haʹzar-eʹnan. This will become your northern boundary.10 “‘Then you should mark as your boundary on the east from Haʹzar-eʹnan to Sheʹpham. 11 The boundary will extend from Sheʹpham to Ribʹlah to the east of Aʹin, and the border will go down and cross the eastern slope of the Sea of Chinʹne·reth. 12 The border will extend to the Jordan, and its end will be the Salt Sea. This will be your land and the boundaries surrounding it.’”13 So Moses instructed the Israelites, saying: “This is the land that you will apportion as your possession by lot, just as Jehovah has commanded to give to the nine and a half tribes. 14 For the tribe of the Reuʹben·ites by their paternal house, the tribe of the Gadʹites by their paternal house, and the half tribe of Ma·nasʹseh have already taken their inheritance. 15 The two and a half tribes have already taken their inheritance east of the region of the Jordan by Jerʹi·cho, toward the sunrising.”16 Jehovah spoke further to Moses, saying: 17 “These are the names of the men who will divide the land for you to possess: El·e·aʹzar the priest and Joshua the son of Nun. 18 And you will take one chieftain out of each tribe to divide the land as your inheritance. 19 These are the names of the men: of the tribe of Judah, Caʹleb the son of Je·phunʹneh; 20 of the tribe of the sons of Simʹe·on, She·muʹel the son of Am·miʹhud; 21 of the tribe of Benjamin, E·liʹdad the son of Chisʹlon; 22 of the tribe of the sons of Dan, a chieftain, Bukʹki the son of Jogʹli; 23 of the sons of Joseph from the tribe of the sons of Ma·nasʹseh, a chieftain, Hanʹni·el the son of Eʹphod; 24 from the tribe of the sons of Eʹphra·im, a chieftain, Kem·uʹel the son of Shiphʹtan; 25 of the tribe of the sons of Zebʹu·lun, a chieftain, E·li·zaʹphan the son of Parʹnach; 26 of the tribe of the sons of Isʹsa·char, a chieftain, Palʹti·el the son of Azʹzan; 27 of the tribe of the sons of Ashʹer, a chieftain, A·hiʹhud the son of She·loʹmi; 28 of the tribe of the sons of Naphʹta·li, a chieftain, Ped·ahʹel the son of Am·miʹhud.” 29 These are the ones whom Jehovah commanded to distribute the land to the Israelites in the land of Caʹnaan.
35 Jehovah went on to speak to Moses on the desert plains of Moʹab by the Jordan at Jerʹi·cho, saying: 2 “Instruct the Israelites that they are to give the Levites cities to inhabit out of the inheritance they will possess, and they should give the Levites the pastures around the cities. 3 They will inhabit the cities, and the pastures will be for their livestock, their goods, and all their other animals. 4 The pastures of the cities that you will give the Levites will extend for 1,000 cubits from the wall all around the city. 5 You should measure outside the city 2,000 cubits on the east side, 2,000 cubits on the south side, 2,000 cubits on the west side, and 2,000 cubits on the north side, with the city in the middle. These will be the pastures of their cities.6 “The cities that you will give to the Levites will be 6 cities of refuge, which you will give for the manslayer to flee to, as well as 42 other cities. 7 You are to give to the Levites a total of 48 cities, together with their pastures. 8 The cities you give them will be from the possession of the Israelites. From the larger group you will take many, and from the smaller group you will take few. Each group will give some of its cities to the Levites in proportion to the inheritance that it receives.”9 Jehovah continued to speak to Moses, saying: 10 “Speak to the Israelites and tell them, ‘You are crossing the Jordan to the land of Caʹnaan. 11 You should choose cities convenient for yourselves to serve as cities of refuge, where the manslayer who unintentionally kills someone should flee. 12 These cities will serve as a refuge for you from the blood avenger, so that the manslayer will not die until he stands trial before the assembly. 13 The six cities of refuge that you provide will serve this purpose. 14 You will provide three cities on this side of the Jordan and three cities in the land of Caʹnaan to serve as cities of refuge. 15 These six cities will serve as a refuge for the Israelites, for the foreign resident, and for the settler among them, for anyone to flee there who unintentionally kills someone.16 “‘But if he struck him with an iron instrument and he dies, he is a murderer. The murderer should be put to death without fail. 17 And if he struck him with a stone that could cause death and he dies, he is a murderer. The murderer should be put to death without fail. 18 And if he struck him with a wooden instrument that could cause death and he dies, he is a murderer. The murderer should be put to death without fail.19 “‘The avenger of blood is the one who will put the murderer to death. When he encounters him, he himself will put him to death. 20 If death resulted because he pushed him out of hatred or threw something at him with malicious intent, 21 or out of hatred he struck him with his hand, and he died, the one who struck him will be put to death without fail. He is a murderer. The avenger of blood will put the murderer to death when he encounters him.22 “‘But if it was unexpectedly and not out of hatred that he pushed him or threw any article at him without malicious intent, 23 or if he did not see him and caused a stone to fall on him and he was not an enemy or seeking his injury, and the person died, 24 the assembly should then judge between the one who struck him and the avenger of blood, in harmony with these judgments. 25 The assembly should then save the manslayer from the hand of the avenger of blood and return him to his city of refuge to which he had fled, and he must dwell in it until the death of the high priest who was anointed with the holy oil.26 “‘But if the manslayer goes out of the boundary of his city of refuge to which he fled 27 and the avenger of blood finds him outside the boundary of his city of refuge and slays the manslayer, he has no bloodguilt. 28 For he must dwell in his city of refuge until the high priest’s death. But after the high priest’s death, the manslayer may return to the land that he owns. 29 These things will serve for you as a statute for judgment throughout your generations in all your dwelling places.30 “‘Whoever kills a person should be put to death as a murderer on the testimony of witnesses; but no one will be put to death on the testimony of just one witness. 31 You must take no ransom for the life of a murderer who is deserving to die, for he should be put to death without fail. 32 And you must not take a ransom for one who has fled to his city of refuge, allowing him to resume dwelling in his land before the death of the high priest.33 “‘You must not pollute the land in which you live, for blood pollutes the land, and there may be no atonement for the blood that has been spilled on the land except by the blood of the one who spilled it. 34 You must not defile the land in which you dwell, in which I am residing; for I, Jehovah, am residing in the midst of the people of Israel.’”
36 The family heads of the descendants of Gilʹe·ad the son of Maʹchir the son of Ma·nasʹseh of the families of the sons of Joseph approached and spoke before Moses and the chieftains, the family heads of the Israelites. 2 They said: “Jehovah commanded my lord to distribute the land by lot as an inheritance to the Israelites; and my lord was commanded by Jehovah to give the inheritance of our brother Ze·loʹphe·had to his daughters. 3 If they marry men from another Israelite tribe, the women’s inheritance will also be withdrawn from the inheritance of our fathers and be added to the inheritance of the tribe to which they would then belong, so that it would be withdrawn from the lot of our inheritance. 4 Now when the Jubilee takes place for the people of Israel, the women’s inheritance will also be added to the inheritance of the tribe to which they then belong, so that their inheritance would be withdrawn from the inheritance of the tribe of our fathers.”5 Then Moses commanded the Israelites at the order of Jehovah: “What the tribe of the sons of Joseph is saying is correct. 6 This is the word that Jehovah has commanded for the daughters of Ze·loʹphe·had: ‘They may marry whomever they wish. However, they should marry someone from a family of the tribe of their father. 7 No inheritance of the Israelites should circulate from tribe to tribe, for the Israelites should hold on to the inheritance of the tribe of their forefathers. 8 And every daughter who possesses an inheritance among the tribes of Israel should become a wife of a descendant of her father’s tribe, so that the Israelites may keep possession of the inheritance of their forefathers. 9 No inheritance should circulate from one tribe to another tribe, for the tribes of Israel should hold on to their own inheritance.’”10 The daughters of Ze·loʹphe·had did just as Jehovah had commanded Moses. 11 So Mahʹlah, Tirʹzah, Hogʹlah, Milʹcah, and Noah, the daughters of Ze·loʹphe·had, married the sons of their father’s brothers. 12 They became wives of men from the families of Ma·nasʹseh the son of Joseph so that their inheritance would remain in the tribe of their father’s family.13 These are the commandments and the judicial decisions that Jehovah gave to the Israelites through Moses on the desert plains of Moʹab by the Jordan at Jerʹi·cho.
4 Jehovah now spoke to Moses and Aaron, saying: 2 “A census should be taken of the sons of Koʹhath from among the sons of Leʹvi, by their families and by their paternal houses, 3 all those from 30 to 50 years old who are in the group assigned to work in the tent of meeting.4 “This is the service of the sons of Koʹhath in the tent of meeting. It is something most holy: 5 Aaron and his sons will come in when the camp is departing and take down the screening curtain and cover the ark of the Testimony with it. 6 They will put a sealskin covering over it and spread out a solid blue cloth over it and put its carrying poles in place.7 “They will also spread out a blue cloth over the table of showbread, and they will put on it the dishes, the cups, the bowls, and the pitchers of the drink offering; the regular offering of bread should remain on it. 8 They will spread out a scarlet cloth over them and cover it with a sealskin covering and put its carrying poles in place. 9 Then they will take a blue cloth and cover the lampstand for the light, along with its lamps, its snuffers, its fire holders, and all its containers for oil that are used to maintain it. 10 They will wrap it and all its utensils in a sealskin covering and put it on a carrying bar. 11 And they will spread out a blue cloth over the golden altar, cover it with a sealskin covering, and put its carrying poles in place. 12 They will then take all the utensils of the ministry with which they regularly minister in the holy place and put them in a blue cloth and cover them with a sealskin covering and put them on a carrying bar.13 “They should remove the ashes from the altar and spread out a cloth of purple wool over it. 14 They will put on it all its utensils that are used when they minister at the altar: the fire holders, the forks, the shovels, and the bowls, all the utensils of the altar; and they are to spread a sealskin covering over it and put its carrying poles in place.15 “Aaron and his sons must finish covering the holy place and all the utensils of the holy place when the camp is departing. Then the sons of Koʹhath will come in to carry them, but they must not touch the holy place or they will die. These things are the responsibility of the sons of Koʹhath in connection with the tent of meeting.16 “El·e·aʹzar the son of Aaron the priest is responsible for overseeing the oil of the lighting, the perfumed incense, the regular grain offering, and the anointing oil. He has oversight of the entire tabernacle and all that is in it, including the holy place and its utensils.”17 Jehovah spoke further to Moses and Aaron, saying: 18 “Do not let the tribe of the families of the Koʹhath·ites be cut off from among the Levites. 19 But do this for them that they may remain alive and not die because of approaching the most holy things. Aaron and his sons will go in and assign each of them to his service and what he is to carry. 20 They must not come in and see the holy things even for an instant, or they will die.”21 Then Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying: 22 “A census should be taken of the sons of Gerʹshon by their paternal houses and their families. 23 You are to register all those from 30 to 50 years old who are in the group assigned to serve in the tent of meeting. 24 This is what the families of the Gerʹshon·ites are assigned to care for and to carry: 25 They will carry the tent cloths of the tabernacle, the tent of meeting, its covering and the sealskin covering that is on top over it, the screen of the entrance of the tent of meeting, 26 the hanging curtains of the courtyard, the screen of the entrance of the courtyard that surrounds the tabernacle and the altar, their tent cords and all their utensils and everything used in its service. This is their assignment. 27 All the service and the loads of the Gerʹshon·ites should be overseen by Aaron and his sons; you will assign all these loads as their responsibility. 28 This is the service that the families of the Gerʹshon·ites are to carry out in the tent of meeting, and their responsibilities are under the direction of Ithʹa·mar the son of Aaron the priest.29 “As for the sons of Me·rarʹi, you will register them by family and by their paternal house. 30 From 30 to 50 years old you will register them, all who are in the group assigned to the service of the tent of meeting. 31 This is what they are responsible for carrying in connection with their service at the tent of meeting: the panel frames of the tabernacle, its bars, its pillars, its socket pedestals; 32 the pillars of the surrounding courtyard, their socket pedestals, their tent pins, and their tent cords together with all their equipment and all the service connected with these. You will assign to them by name the equipment they are responsible for carrying. 33 This is how the families of the sons of Me·rarʹi are to serve at the tent of meeting, under the direction of Ithʹa·mar the son of Aaron the priest.”34 Moses and Aaron and the chieftains of the assembly then registered the sons of the Koʹhath·ites by their families and by their paternal house, 35 all those from 30 to 50 years old who were in the group assigned to the service of the tent of meeting. 36 The total of those registered by their families was 2,750. 37 These were registered from the families of the Koʹhath·ites, all those who were serving at the tent of meeting. Moses and Aaron registered them at the order of Jehovah through Moses.38 The sons of Gerʹshon were registered by their families and by their paternal house, 39 all those from 30 to 50 years old who were in the group assigned to the service at the tent of meeting. 40 The total of those registered by their families and by their paternal house was 2,630. 41 This was the registration of the families of the sons of Gerʹshon, all those who were serving at the tent of meeting. Moses and Aaron had them registered at the order of Jehovah.42 The sons of Me·rarʹi were registered by their families and by their paternal house, 43 all those from 30 to 50 years old who were in the group assigned to the service at the tent of meeting. 44 The total of those registered of them by their families was 3,200. 45 This was the registration of the families of the sons of Me·rarʹi, whom Moses and Aaron registered at the order of Jehovah through Moses.46 Moses and Aaron and the chieftains of Israel registered all these Levites by their families and by their paternal houses; 47 they were from 30 to 50 years old, and all were assigned to serve and carry loads in connection with the tent of meeting. 48 The total of those registered was 8,580. 49 They were registered at the order of Jehovah through Moses, each according to his assigned service and his load; they were registered just as Jehovah had commanded Moses.
5 Jehovah spoke further to Moses, saying: 2 “Command the Israelites to send out of the camp every leprous person and everyone having a discharge and everyone unclean by a dead person. 3 Whether a male or a female, you should send them out. You should send them outside the camp, so that they may not contaminate the camps of those in whose midst I am dwelling.” 4 Therefore, the Israelites did so and sent them outside the camp. Just as Jehovah told Moses, so the Israelites did.5 Jehovah continued speaking to Moses, saying: 6 “Tell the Israelites, ‘If a man or a woman commits any of the sins of mankind and acts unfaithfully toward Jehovah, that person has become guilty. 7 He must confess the sin that he has committed and return the full amount as compensation for his guilt and also add a fifth of its value; he is to give it to the one he wronged. 8 But if the victim does not have a close relative to receive the compensation, it should be returned to Jehovah and will belong to the priest, apart from the ram of atonement with which he will make atonement for him.9 “‘Every holy contribution from the Israelites that is presented to the priest should become his. 10 The holy things of each person will remain his own. Whatever each one gives to the priest, that will belong to the priest.’”11 Jehovah went on to speak to Moses, saying: 12 “Speak to the Israelites and tell them, ‘This is what should be done if a man’s wife goes astray and is unfaithful to him 13 and another man has sexual relations with her, but it was unknown to her husband and remains undiscovered, so that she has defiled herself but there is no witness against her and she has not been caught: 14 Whether the husband becomes jealous and suspicious of his wife’s faithfulness when she has defiled herself, or whether he is jealous and suspicious of his wife’s faithfulness when she has not defiled herself, 15 the man must bring his wife to the priest, along with an offering for her, a tenth of an eʹphah of barley flour. He must not pour oil on it nor put frankincense on it, because it is a grain offering of jealousy, a grain offering bringing guilt to mind.16 “‘The priest will bring her forward and make her stand before Jehovah. 17 The priest will take holy water in an earthenware vessel, and the priest will take some of the dust from the floor of the tabernacle and put it in the water. 18 And the priest will make the woman stand before Jehovah and unbind the woman’s hair and put in her palms the grain offering for a reminder, that is, the grain offering of jealousy, and the priest will have in his hand the bitter water that brings a curse.19 “‘The priest will then make her swear, saying to the woman: “If no other man had sexual relations with you while you were under your husband’s authority and you have not gone astray and become defiled, may you be free of the effect of this bitter water that brings a curse. 20 But if you have gone astray while under your husband’s authority by defiling yourself, and you have had sexual relations with another man besides your husband—” 21 The priest will then make the woman swear an oath that includes a curse, and the priest will say to the woman: “May Jehovah make you an object for cursing and for an oath among your people, as Jehovah makes your thigh fall away and causes your abdomen to swell. 22 This water that brings a curse will enter into your intestines to cause your abdomen to swell and make your thigh fall away.” To this the woman should say: “Amen! Amen!”23 “‘Then the priest should write these curses in the book and wash them off into the bitter water. 24 He will then make the woman drink the bitter water that brings a curse, and the water that brings a curse will enter into her and produce bitterness. 25 And the priest should take the grain offering of jealousy from the woman’s hand and wave the grain offering back and forth before Jehovah, and he will bring it near the altar. 26 The priest will take a handful of the grain offering as a token offering and make it smoke on the altar, and afterward he will make the woman drink the water. 27 When he makes her drink the water, if she has defiled herself and committed an act of unfaithfulness toward her husband, the water that brings a curse will then enter into her and become something bitter, and her abdomen will swell, and her thigh will fall away, and the woman will become an object of cursing among her people. 28 However, if the woman has not defiled herself and is clean, she will then be free from such punishment, and she will be able to conceive and produce offspring.29 “‘This is the law about jealousy, when a woman may go astray and defile herself while under her husband’s authority, 30 or in the case of a man who becomes jealous and suspects his wife of unfaithfulness; he should make his wife stand before Jehovah, and the priest must carry out toward her all this law. 31 The man will be free from guilt, but his wife will answer for her guilt.’”
6 Jehovah spoke further to Moses and said: 2 “Speak to the Israelites and tell them, ‘If a man or a woman takes a special vow to live as a Nazʹi·rite to Jehovah, 3 he should keep away from wine and other alcoholic beverages. He should not drink the vinegar of wine or the vinegar of anything alcoholic. He should not drink any liquid made from grapes, nor eat grapes, whether fresh or dried. 4 All the days of his Naziriteship he should not eat anything made from the grapevine, from the unripe grapes to the skins.5 “‘All the days of the vow of his Naziriteship no razor should pass over his head. He is to remain holy by letting the hair of his head grow until the days of his being set apart to Jehovah are completed. 6 He should not approach a dead person during all the days he remains separated to Jehovah. 7 Even if his father or his mother or his brother or his sister should die, he may not defile himself, because the sign of his Naziriteship to his God is upon his head.8 “‘He is holy to Jehovah all the days of his Naziriteship. 9 But if someone should suddenly die alongside him and he defiles the hair symbolizing his separation to God, he must shave his head on the day he establishes his purification. He should shave it on the seventh day. 10 And on the eighth day, he should bring two turtledoves or two young pigeons to the priest at the entrance of the tent of meeting. 11 The priest will prepare one as a sin offering and the other as a burnt offering and make atonement for him for his sin in connection with the dead person. Then he must sanctify his head on that day. 12 And he must separate himself again to Jehovah for the days of his Naziriteship, and he will bring a young ram in its first year as a guilt offering. However, the former days will go uncounted because he defiled his Naziriteship.13 “‘Now this is the law about the Nazʹi·rite: When he completes the days of his Naziriteship, he will be brought to the entrance of the tent of meeting. 14 There he must present his offering to Jehovah: one sound young ram in its first year as a burnt offering, one sound female lamb in its first year as a sin offering, one sound ram as a communion sacrifice, 15 a basket of unleavened ring-shaped loaves of fine flour mixed with oil, unleavened wafers smeared with oil, and their grain offering and their drink offerings. 16 The priest will present them before Jehovah and will offer up his sin offering and his burnt offering. 17 He will offer the ram as a communion sacrifice to Jehovah along with the basket of unleavened loaves, and the priest will present its grain offering and its drink offering.18 “‘The Nazʹi·rite must then shave the uncut hair of his head at the entrance of the tent of meeting, and he will take the hair of his head grown during his Naziriteship and put it on the fire that is under the communion sacrifice. 19 And the priest must take a boiled shoulder from the ram, one unleavened ring-shaped loaf from the basket, and one unleavened wafer, and put them on the palms of the Nazʹi·rite after he has had the sign of his Naziriteship shaved off. 20 And the priest must wave them back and forth as a wave offering before Jehovah. It is something holy for the priest, along with the breast of the wave offering and the leg of the contribution. Afterward, the Nazʹi·rite may drink wine.21 “‘This is the law about the Nazʹi·rite who makes a vow: If he vows and can afford to make an offering to Jehovah that is beyond the requirements of his Naziriteship, he must then carry out his vow out of regard for the law of his Naziriteship.’”22 Then Jehovah said to Moses: 23 “Tell Aaron and his sons, ‘This is the way you should bless the people of Israel. Say to them:24 “May Jehovah bless you and safeguard you.25 May Jehovah make his face shine upon you, and may he favor you.26 May Jehovah lift up his face toward you and grant you peace.”’27 And they must place my name upon the people of Israel, that I may bless them.”
7 On the day that Moses finished setting up the tabernacle, he anointed it and sanctified it, together with all its furnishings, the altar, and all its utensils. When he had anointed and sanctified these things, 2 the chieftains of Israel, the heads of their paternal houses, made an offering. These chieftains of the tribes who presided over the registration 3 brought before Jehovah their offering of six covered wagons and 12 oxen, a wagon for two chieftains and a bull for each one; and they presented them before the tabernacle. 4 Jehovah said to Moses: 5 “Accept these things from them, as they will be used for the service of the tent of meeting, and you should give them to the Levites, to each one as needed for his duties.”6 So Moses accepted the wagons and the cattle and gave them to the Levites. 7 He gave two wagons and four oxen to the sons of Gerʹshon, according to what was needed for their duties; 8 and he gave four wagons and eight oxen to the sons of Me·rarʹi, according to what was needed for their duties, under the direction of Ithʹa·mar the son of Aaron the priest. 9 But he did not give any to the sons of Koʹhath because their duties involved the service of the holy place, and they carried the holy things on their shoulders.10 Now the chieftains made their presentation at the inauguration of the altar on the day it was anointed. When the chieftains presented their offering before the altar, 11 Jehovah said to Moses: “One chieftain each day, on successive days, will present his offering for the inauguration of the altar.”12 The one who presented his offering on the first day was Nahʹshon the son of Am·minʹa·dab of the tribe of Judah. 13 His offering was one silver dish weighing 130 shekels and one silver bowl weighing 70 shekels by the standard shekel of the holy place, both of them full of fine flour mixed with oil for a grain offering; 14 one gold cup weighing 10 shekels, full of incense; 15 one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb in its first year for a burnt offering; 16 one young goat for a sin offering; 17 and for a communion sacrifice, two cattle, five rams, five male goats, and five male lambs each a year old. This was the offering of Nahʹshon the son of Am·minʹa·dab.18 On the second day, Ne·thanʹel the son of Zuʹar, the chieftain of Isʹsa·char, made a presentation. 19 He presented as his offering one silver dish weighing 130 shekels and one silver bowl weighing 70 shekels by the standard shekel of the holy place, both of them full of fine flour mixed with oil for a grain offering; 20 one gold cup weighing 10 shekels, full of incense; 21 one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb in its first year for a burnt offering; 22 one young goat for a sin offering; 23 and for a communion sacrifice, two cattle, five rams, five male goats, and five male lambs each a year old. This was the offering of Ne·thanʹel the son of Zuʹar.24 On the third day, the chieftain for the sons of Zebʹu·lun, E·liʹab the son of Heʹlon, 25 made his offering of one silver dish weighing 130 shekels and one silver bowl weighing 70 shekels by the standard shekel of the holy place, both of them full of fine flour mixed with oil for a grain offering; 26 one gold cup weighing 10 shekels, full of incense; 27 one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb in its first year for a burnt offering; 28 one young goat for a sin offering; 29 and for a communion sacrifice, two cattle, five rams, five male goats, and five male lambs each a year old. This was the offering of E·liʹab the son of Heʹlon.30 On the fourth day, the chieftain for the sons of Reuʹben, E·liʹzur the son of Shedʹe·ur, 31 made his offering of one silver dish weighing 130 shekels and one silver bowl weighing 70 shekels by the standard shekel of the holy place, both of them full of fine flour mixed with oil for a grain offering; 32 one gold cup weighing 10 shekels, full of incense; 33 one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb in its first year for a burnt offering; 34 one young goat for a sin offering; 35 and for a communion sacrifice, two cattle, five rams, five male goats, and five male lambs each a year old. This was the offering of E·liʹzur the son of Shedʹe·ur.36 On the fifth day, the chieftain for the sons of Simʹe·on, She·luʹmi·el the son of Zu·ri·shadʹdai, 37 made his offering of one silver dish weighing 130 shekels and one silver bowl weighing 70 shekels by the standard shekel of the holy place, both of them full of fine flour mixed with oil for a grain offering; 38 one gold cup weighing 10 shekels, full of incense; 39 one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb in its first year for a burnt offering; 40 one young goat for a sin offering; 41 and for a communion sacrifice, two cattle, five rams, five male goats, and five male lambs each a year old. This was the offering of She·luʹmi·el the son of Zu·ri·shadʹdai.42 On the sixth day, the chieftain for the sons of Gad, E·liʹa·saph the son of Deuʹel, 43 made his offering of one silver dish weighing 130 shekels and one silver bowl weighing 70 shekels by the standard shekel of the holy place, both of them full of fine flour mixed with oil for a grain offering; 44 one gold cup weighing 10 shekels, full of incense; 45 one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb in its first year for a burnt offering; 46 one young goat for a sin offering; 47 and for a communion sacrifice, two cattle, five rams, five male goats, and five male lambs each a year old. This was the offering of E·liʹa·saph the son of Deuʹel.48 On the seventh day, the chieftain for the sons of Eʹphra·im, E·lishʹa·ma the son of Am·miʹhud, 49 made his offering of one silver dish weighing 130 shekels and one silver bowl weighing 70 shekels by the standard shekel of the holy place, both of them full of fine flour mixed with oil for a grain offering; 50 one gold cup weighing 10 shekels, full of incense; 51 one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb in its first year for a burnt offering; 52 one young goat for a sin offering; 53 and for a communion sacrifice, two cattle, five rams, five male goats, and five male lambs each a year old. This was the offering of E·lishʹa·ma the son of Am·miʹhud.54 On the eighth day, the chieftain for the sons of Ma·nasʹseh, Ga·maʹli·el the son of Pe·dahʹzur, 55 made his offering of one silver dish weighing 130 shekels and one silver bowl weighing 70 shekels by the standard shekel of the holy place, both of them full of fine flour mixed with oil for a grain offering; 56 one gold cup weighing 10 shekels, full of incense; 57 one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb in its first year, for a burnt offering; 58 one young goat for a sin offering; 59 and for a communion sacrifice, two cattle, five rams, five male goats, and five male lambs each a year old. This was the offering of Ga·maʹli·el the son of Pe·dahʹzur.60 On the ninth day, the chieftain for the sons of Benjamin, Abʹi·dan the son of Gid·e·oʹni, 61 made his offering of one silver dish weighing 130 shekels and one silver bowl weighing 70 shekels by the standard shekel of the holy place, both of them full of fine flour mixed with oil for a grain offering; 62 one gold cup weighing 10 shekels, full of incense; 63 one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb in its first year for a burnt offering; 64 one young goat for a sin offering; 65 and for a communion sacrifice, two cattle, five rams, five male goats, and five male lambs each a year old. This was the offering of Abʹi·dan the son of Gid·e·oʹni.66 On the tenth day, the chieftain for the sons of Dan, A·hi·eʹzer the son of Am·mi·shadʹdai, 67 made his offering of one silver dish weighing 130 shekels and one silver bowl weighing 70 shekels by the standard shekel of the holy place, both of them full of fine flour mixed with oil for a grain offering; 68 one gold cup weighing 10 shekels, full of incense; 69 one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb in its first year for a burnt offering; 70 one young goat for a sin offering; 71 and for a communion sacrifice, two cattle, five rams, five male goats, and five male lambs each a year old. This was the offering of A·hi·eʹzer the son of Am·mi·shadʹdai.72 On the 11th day, the chieftain for the sons of Ashʹer, Paʹgi·el the son of Ochʹran, 73 made his offering of one silver dish weighing 130 shekels and one silver bowl weighing 70 shekels by the standard shekel of the holy place, both of them full of fine flour mixed with oil for a grain offering; 74 one gold cup weighing 10 shekels, full of incense; 75 one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb in its first year for a burnt offering; 76 one young goat for a sin offering; 77 and for a communion sacrifice, two cattle, five rams, five male goats, and five male lambs each a year old. This was the offering of Paʹgi·el the son of Ochʹran.78 On the 12th day, the chieftain for the sons of Naphʹta·li, A·hiʹra the son of Eʹnan, 79 made his offering of one silver dish weighing 130 shekels and one silver bowl weighing 70 shekels by the standard shekel of the holy place, both of them full of fine flour mixed with oil for a grain offering; 80 one gold cup weighing 10 shekels, full of incense; 81 one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb in its first year for a burnt offering; 82 one young goat for a sin offering; 83 and for a communion sacrifice, two cattle, five rams, five male goats, and five male lambs each a year old. This was the offering of A·hiʹra the son of Eʹnan.84 This was the inauguration offering of the altar from the chieftains of Israel when it was anointed: 12 silver dishes, 12 silver bowls, 12 gold cups; 85 each silver dish weighing 130 shekels and each bowl weighing 70 shekels, all the silver of the vessels amounting to 2,400 shekels by the standard shekel of the holy place; 86 the 12 gold cups full of incense each weighed 10 shekels by the standard shekel of the holy place, all the gold of the cups amounting to 120 shekels. 87 All the cattle for the burnt offering were 12 bulls, 12 rams, 12 male lambs each a year old and their grain offerings, and 12 young goats for a sin offering; 88 and all the cattle of the communion sacrifice amounted to 24 bulls, 60 rams, 60 male goats, and 60 male lambs each a year old. This was the inauguration offering of the altar after it was anointed.89 Whenever Moses went into the tent of meeting to speak with God, he would hear the voice conversing with him from above the cover of the ark of the Testimony, from between the two cherubs; and God would speak to him.
8 Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying: 2 “Speak to Aaron and tell him, ‘When you light up the lamps, the seven lamps should shine on the area in front of the lampstand.’” 3 So Aaron did this: He lit up its lamps for the area in front of the lampstand, just as Jehovah had commanded Moses. 4 This is how the lampstand was made: It was hammered work of gold; from its stem to its blossoms, it was hammered work. The lampstand was made according to the vision that Jehovah had shown Moses.5 Jehovah spoke again to Moses, saying: 6 “Take the Levites from among the Israelites, and cleanse them. 7 This is how you should cleanse them: Sprinkle sin-cleansing water on them, and they must shave their whole body with a razor, wash their garments, and cleanse themselves. 8 Then they will take a young bull and its grain offering of fine flour mixed with oil, and you will take another young bull for a sin offering. 9 And you are to present the Levites before the tent of meeting and gather all the assembly of the Israelites. 10 When you present the Levites before Jehovah, the Israelites are to lay their hands on the Levites. 11 And Aaron must offer the Levites before Jehovah as a wave offering from the Israelites, and they will carry out the service of Jehovah.12 “Then the Levites will lay their hands on the heads of the bulls and offer the one as a sin offering and the other as a burnt offering to Jehovah to make atonement for the Levites. 13 And you will have the Levites stand before Aaron and his sons and offer them as a wave offering to Jehovah. 14 You must separate the Levites from among the Israelites, and the Levites will become mine. 15 Afterward, the Levites will come in to serve at the tent of meeting. This is how you should cleanse them and offer them as a wave offering. 16 For they are given ones, given to me from among the Israelites. In place of all those who are firstborn of the Israelites, I will take them for myself. 17 For every firstborn among the Israelites is mine, both man and animal. I sanctified them to myself on the day I struck down every firstborn in the land of Egypt. 18 I will take the Levites in place of all the firstborn among the Israelites. 19 I will give the Levites as given ones to Aaron and his sons from among the Israelites, to carry out the service in behalf of the Israelites at the tent of meeting and to make atonement for the Israelites, so that no plague may occur among the Israelites because the people of Israel come near the holy place.”20 Moses and Aaron and all the assembly of the Israelites did this with the Levites. In accord with all that Jehovah had commanded Moses regarding the Levites, that is what the Israelites did with them. 21 So the Levites purified themselves and washed their garments, after which Aaron offered them as a wave offering before Jehovah. Then Aaron made atonement for them to cleanse them. 22 Thereafter, the Levites went in to carry out their service at the tent of meeting before Aaron and his sons. Just as Jehovah had commanded Moses respecting the Levites, so they did with them.23 Jehovah now spoke to Moses, saying: 24 “This applies to the Levites: From 25 years old and up, a man will join the company of those in the service of the tent of meeting. 25 But after the age of 50 years, he will retire from the service company and not serve any longer. 26 He may minister to his brothers who are taking care of the responsibilities at the tent of meeting, but he must not perform the service there. This is what you are to do regarding the Levites and their responsibilities.”
9 Jehovah spoke to Moses in the wilderness of Siʹnai in the first month of the second year after they had come out of the land of Egypt, saying: 2 “The Israelites should prepare the Passover sacrifice at its appointed time. 3 On the 14th day of this month at twilight, you should prepare it at its appointed time. According to all its statutes and all its set procedures, you should prepare it.”4 So Moses told the Israelites to prepare the Passover sacrifice. 5 Then they prepared the Passover sacrifice in the first month, on the 14th day of the month at twilight, in the wilderness of Siʹnai. According to all that Jehovah had commanded Moses, so the Israelites did.6 Now there were men who had become unclean by touching a dead body, so that they were not able to prepare the Passover sacrifice on that day. So those men presented themselves before Moses and Aaron on that day 7 and said to him: “We are unclean because of touching a dead body. Why should we be kept from presenting the offering to Jehovah at its appointed time among the Israelites?” 8 At this Moses said to them: “Wait there, and let me hear what Jehovah may command regarding you.”9 Then Jehovah said to Moses: 10 “Tell the Israelites, ‘Although any man among you or of your future generations should become unclean by touching a dead body or should be off on a distant journey, he must still prepare the Passover sacrifice to Jehovah. 11 They should prepare it in the second month, on the 14th day at twilight. They should eat it together with unleavened bread and bitter greens. 12 They must not let any of it remain until morning, and they should not break any bone in it. They should prepare it according to every statute regarding the Passover. 13 But if a man was clean or was not off on a journey and neglected to prepare the Passover sacrifice, that person must then be cut off from his people, because he did not present the offering of Jehovah at its appointed time. That man will answer for his sin.14 “‘And if a foreign resident is residing with you, he should also prepare the Passover sacrifice to Jehovah. He should do so according to the statute of the Passover and its set procedure. There should exist one statute for you, both for the foreign resident and for the native of the land.’”15 Now on the day the tabernacle was set up, the cloud covered the tabernacle, the tent of the Testimony, but in the evening what appeared to be fire remained over the tabernacle until morning. 16 That is what continued to take place: The cloud would cover it by day, and the appearance of fire by night. 17 Whenever the cloud lifted from the tent, the Israelites would promptly depart, and in the place where the cloud would remain, there is where the Israelites would encamp. 18 At the order of Jehovah the Israelites would depart, and at the order of Jehovah they would encamp. As long as the cloud remained over the tabernacle, they would remain encamped. 19 When the cloud would stay over the tabernacle for many days, the Israelites would obey Jehovah and not depart. 20 Sometimes the cloud would remain for a few days over the tabernacle. At the order of Jehovah they would remain encamped, and at the order of Jehovah they would depart. 21 Sometimes the cloud would remain only from evening until morning, and when the cloud lifted in the morning, they would depart. Whether it was day or night when the cloud lifted, they would depart. 22 Whether it was two days, a month, or longer, as long as the cloud stayed over the tabernacle, the Israelites remained encamped and would not depart. But when it lifted, they would depart. 23 At the order of Jehovah they would encamp, and at the order of Jehovah they would depart. They kept their obligation to Jehovah at the order of Jehovah through Moses.
1 And Jehovah spoke to Moses in the wilderness of Siʹnai, in the tent of meeting, on the first day of the second month, in the second year of their coming out of the land of Egypt. He said: 2 “Take a census of the whole assembly of the Israelites individually according to their families, according to their paternal houses, according to the count of the names of all the males. 3 You and Aaron are to register by their companies all those from 20 years old and up who can serve in the army in Israel.4 “Take with you one man from each tribe; each one is to be a head of his paternal house. 5 These are the names of the men who will stand with you: of Reuʹben, E·liʹzur the son of Shedʹe·ur; 6 of Simʹe·on, She·luʹmi·el the son of Zu·ri·shadʹdai; 7 of Judah, Nahʹshon the son of Am·minʹa·dab; 8 of Isʹsa·char, Ne·thanʹel the son of Zuʹar; 9 of Zebʹu·lun, E·liʹab the son of Heʹlon; 10 of the sons of Joseph: from Eʹphra·im, E·lishʹa·ma the son of Am·miʹhud; from Ma·nasʹseh, Ga·maʹli·el the son of Pe·dahʹzur; 11 of Benjamin, Abʹi·dan the son of Gid·e·oʹni; 12 of Dan, A·hi·eʹzer the son of Am·mi·shadʹdai; 13 of Ashʹer, Paʹgi·el the son of Ochʹran; 14 of Gad, E·liʹa·saph the son of Deuʹel; 15 of Naphʹta·li, A·hiʹra the son of Eʹnan. 16 These are the ones summoned from the assembly. They are the chieftains of the tribes of their fathers, the heads of the thousands of Israel.”17 So Moses and Aaron took these men who had been designated by name. 18 They gathered all the assembly on the first day of the second month, so that they might be registered individually by name, by family, and by their paternal houses, from 20 years old and up, 19 just as Jehovah had commanded Moses. So he registered them in the wilderness of Siʹnai.20 The sons of Reuʹben, the descendants of Israel’s firstborn, were listed by name, by family, and by their paternal houses. All the males from 20 years old and up who could serve in the army were counted individually, 21 and the number registered of the tribe of Reuʹben was 46,500.22 The descendants of Simʹe·on were listed by name, by family, and by their paternal houses. All the males from 20 years old and up who could serve in the army were counted individually, 23 and the number registered of the tribe of Simʹe·on was 59,300.24 The descendants of Gad were listed by name, by family, and by their paternal houses. All the males from 20 years old and up who could serve in the army were counted, 25 and the number registered of the tribe of Gad was 45,650.26 The descendants of Judah were listed by name, by family, and by their paternal houses. All the males from 20 years old and up who could serve in the army were counted, 27 and the number registered of the tribe of Judah was 74,600.28 The descendants of Isʹsa·char were listed by name, by family, and by their paternal houses. All the males from 20 years old and up who could serve in the army were counted, 29 and the number registered of the tribe of Isʹsa·char was 54,400.30 The descendants of Zebʹu·lun were listed by name, by family, and by their paternal houses. All the males from 20 years old and up who could serve in the army were counted, 31 and the number registered of the tribe of Zebʹu·lun was 57,400.32 The descendants of Joseph through Eʹphra·im were listed by name, by family, and by their paternal houses. All the males from 20 years old and up who could serve in the army were counted, 33 and the number registered of the tribe of Eʹphra·im was 40,500.34 The descendants of Ma·nasʹseh were listed by name, by family, and by their paternal houses. All the males from 20 years old and up who could serve in the army were counted, 35 and the number registered of the tribe of Ma·nasʹseh was 32,200.36 The descendants of Benjamin were listed by name, by family, and by their paternal houses. All the males from 20 years old and up who could serve in the army were counted, 37 and the number registered of the tribe of Benjamin was 35,400.38 The descendants of Dan were listed by name, by family, and by their paternal houses. All the males from 20 years old and up who could serve in the army were counted, 39 and the number registered of the tribe of Dan was 62,700.40 The descendants of Ashʹer were listed by name, by family, and by their paternal houses. All the males from 20 years old and up who could serve in the army were counted, 41 and the number registered of the tribe of Ashʹer was 41,500.42 The descendants of Naphʹta·li were listed by name, by family, and by their paternal houses. All the males from 20 years old and up who could serve in the army were counted, 43 and the number registered of the tribe of Naphʹta·li was 53,400.44 These were registered by Moses together with Aaron and the 12 chieftains of Israel, each representing his paternal house. 45 All the Israelites from 20 years old and up who could serve in the army in Israel were registered by their paternal house, 46 and the total number registered was 603,550.47 But the Levites were not registered in among them by the tribe of their fathers. 48 So Jehovah told Moses: 49 “Only the tribe of Leʹvi you are not to register, and you should not include the number of them along with the other Israelites. 50 You should appoint the Levites over the tabernacle of the Testimony and over all its utensils and over everything that belongs to it. They will carry the tabernacle and all its utensils, and they will minister at it, and they are to camp around the tabernacle. 51 Whenever the tabernacle is to be moved, the Levites should take it down; and when the tabernacle is to be reassembled, the Levites should set it up; and any unauthorized person who comes near should be put to death.52 “Each Israelite should set up his tent in his assigned camp, each man according to his three-tribe division by their companies. 53 And the Levites should encamp around the tabernacle of the Testimony, so that no indignation may arise against the assembly of the Israelites; and the Levites must be responsible for the care of the tabernacle of the Testimony.”54 The people of Israel did all that Jehovah had commanded Moses. They did just so.
10 “At that time Jehovah said to me, ‘Carve out for yourself two tablets of stone like the first ones, and come up to me on the mountain; also you must make for yourself an ark of wood. 2 And I will write on the tablets the words that appeared on the first tablets, which you shattered, and you should place them in the ark.’ 3 So I made an ark of acacia wood and carved out two tablets of stone like the first ones and went up the mountain with the two tablets in my hand. 4 Then he wrote on the tablets the words he had written before, the Ten Commandments, which Jehovah had spoken to you on the mountain out of the fire on the day of the assembly; and Jehovah gave them to me. 5 Then I turned and went down the mountain and placed the tablets in the ark that I had made, where they remain, just as Jehovah had commanded me.6 “The Israelites then departed from Be·erʹoth Benʹe-jaʹa·kan for Mo·seʹrah. There Aaron died and was buried, and his son El·e·aʹzar began to serve as priest in his place. 7 From there they departed for Gudʹgo·dah, and from Gudʹgo·dah for Jotʹba·thah, a land flowing with streams of water.8 “At that time Jehovah set apart the tribe of Leʹvi to carry the ark of Jehovah’s covenant, to stand before Jehovah in order to minister to him, and to bless in his name, as they do to this day. 9 That is why Leʹvi has no share or inheritance with his brothers. Jehovah is his inheritance, just as Jehovah your God had said to him. 10 I myself stayed on the mountain as I did the first time, 40 days and 40 nights, and Jehovah listened to me on that occasion also. Jehovah did not want to destroy you. 11 Then Jehovah said to me, ‘Go ahead of the people, and prepare to depart, so that they may go in and take possession of the land that I have sworn to their forefathers to give to them.’12 “Now, O Israel, what is Jehovah your God asking of you? Only this: to fear Jehovah your God, to walk in all his ways, to love him, to serve Jehovah your God with all your heart and all your soul, 13 and to keep the commandments and statutes of Jehovah that I am commanding you today for your own good. 14 Look, to Jehovah your God belong the heavens, even the heavens of the heavens, and the earth with all that is in it. 15 But only to your forefathers did Jehovah draw close and express his love, and he has chosen you, their offspring, out of all the peoples, as you are today. 16 You must now cleanse your hearts and stop being so stubborn. 17 For Jehovah your God is the God of gods and the Lord of lords, the God great, mighty, and awe-inspiring, who treats none with partiality and does not accept a bribe. 18 He executes justice for the fatherless child and the widow and loves the foreign resident, giving him food and clothing. 19 You too must love the foreign resident, for you became foreign residents in the land of Egypt.20 “Jehovah your God you should fear, him you should serve, to him you should cling, and by his name you should swear. 21 He is the One you are to praise. He is your God, who has done all these great and awe-inspiring things for you that your own eyes have seen. 22 With 70 people your forefathers went down into Egypt, and now Jehovah your God has made you as numerous as the stars of the heavens.
11 “You must love Jehovah your God and always keep your obligation to him and his statutes, his judicial decisions, and his commandments. 2 You know that today I am addressing you, not your sons who have not known or seen the discipline of Jehovah your God, his greatness, his mighty hand and his outstretched arm. 3 They did not see his signs and his deeds that he did in Egypt to Pharʹaoh king of Egypt and to all his land; 4 or what he did to the armies of Egypt, to Pharʹaoh’s horses and war chariots, which were overwhelmed by the waters of the Red Sea when they were chasing after you, and Jehovah destroyed them once and for all. 5 They did not see what he has done for you in the wilderness until your coming to this place, 6 or what he did to Daʹthan and A·biʹram, the sons of E·liʹab the son of Reuʹben, when the earth opened and swallowed them up, along with their households and their tents and every living thing that followed them, before the eyes of all Israel. 7 Your own eyes have seen all the great deeds that Jehovah did.8 “You must keep the whole commandment that I am giving you today, so that you may grow strong and cross over into the land to take possession of it, 9 and so that you may live long in the land that Jehovah swore to give to your forefathers and their offspring, a land flowing with milk and honey.10 “The land you are going to take possession of is not like the land of Egypt, out of which you came, where you used to sow your seed and irrigate it with your foot, like a garden of vegetables. 11 But the land you are about to cross into and possess is a land of mountains and valley plains. It drinks the water that rains from the heavens; 12 it is a land that Jehovah your God is caring for. The eyes of Jehovah your God are constantly upon it, from the beginning of the year to the close of the year.13 “And if you will diligently obey my commandments that I am commanding you today and love Jehovah your God and serve him with all your heart and all your soul, 14 I will also give rain for your land at its appointed time, autumn rain and spring rain, and you will gather your grain and your new wine and your oil. 15 And I will provide vegetation in your fields for your livestock, and you will eat and be satisfied. 16 Be careful not to let your heart be enticed to go astray and worship other gods and bow down to them. 17 Otherwise, Jehovah’s anger will blaze against you, and he will shut up the heavens so that it will not rain and the ground will not give its produce and you will quickly perish from the good land that Jehovah is giving you.18 “You must impress these words of mine on your heart and your soul and bind them as a reminder on your hand, and they should be like a headband on your forehead. 19 Teach them to your children, speaking about them when you sit in your house and when you walk on the road and when you lie down and when you get up. 20 Write them on the doorposts of your house and on your gates, 21 so that you and your sons may live long in the land that Jehovah swore to give to your forefathers, for as long as the heavens are over the earth.22 “If you strictly observe this commandment that I am giving you and you carry it out, to love Jehovah your God, to walk in all his ways and to cling to him, 23 Jehovah will drive away all these nations from before you, and you will dispossess nations greater and more numerous than you are. 24 Every place you set your foot will become yours. From the wilderness up to Lebʹa·non, from the River, the river Eu·phraʹtes, to the western sea, your boundary will become. 25 Nobody will stand up to you. Jehovah your God will spread the dread and the fear of you over the whole land on which you walk, just as he promised you.26 “See, I am putting before you today a blessing and a curse: 27 the blessing if you obey the commandments of Jehovah your God that I am commanding you today, 28 and the curse if you do not obey the commandments of Jehovah your God and you turn aside from the way I am commanding you to follow today and you follow gods that you have not known.29 “When Jehovah your God brings you into the land you are to possess, you must pronounce the blessing on Mount Gerʹi·zim and the curse on Mount Eʹbal. 30 Are they not on the other side of the Jordan toward the west, in the land of the Caʹnaan·ites who live in the Arʹa·bah, opposite Gilʹgal, beside the big trees of Moʹreh? 31 For you are crossing the Jordan to enter and take possession of the land that Jehovah your God is giving you. When you take possession of it and live in it, 32 you must be careful to carry out all the regulations and the judicial decisions that I am putting before you today.
12 “These are the regulations and the judicial decisions that you should be careful to carry out all the days that you are alive in the land that Jehovah the God of your forefathers will give you to possess. 2 You should completely destroy all the places where the nations you will dispossess have served their gods, whether on the high mountains or on the hills or under any luxuriant tree. 3 You should pull down their altars, shatter their sacred pillars, burn their sacred poles in the fire, and cut down the graven images of their gods, obliterating their very names from that place.4 “You must not worship Jehovah your God in that way. 5 Rather, seek Jehovah your God wherever he chooses to establish his name and his place of residence among all your tribes, and go there. 6 That is where you are to bring your burnt offerings, your sacrifices, your tithes, the contribution from your hand, your vow offerings, your voluntary offerings, and the firstborn of your herd and flock. 7 You and your households must eat there before Jehovah your God and rejoice in all your undertakings, because Jehovah your God has blessed you.8 “You must not do as we are doing here today, with everyone doing whatever is right in his own eyes, 9 because you have not yet come into the resting-place and the inheritance that Jehovah your God is giving you. 10 When you do cross the Jordan and dwell in the land that Jehovah your God is giving you to possess, he will certainly give you rest from all your enemies around you, and you will dwell in security. 11 You will bring all that I am commanding you to the place that Jehovah your God chooses to have his name reside—your burnt offerings, your sacrifices, your tithes, the contribution from your hand, and every vow offering that you vow to Jehovah. 12 You will rejoice before Jehovah your God, you and your sons, your daughters, your male and female slaves, and the Levite inside your cities, for he has no share or inheritance with you. 13 Be careful not to offer up your burnt offerings in any other place you may see. 14 You should offer your burnt offerings only in the place that Jehovah chooses in one of your tribal territories, and there you should do everything I am commanding you.15 “But whenever you desire it, you may slaughter and eat meat, according to the blessing that Jehovah your God has given you in all your cities. The unclean person and the clean person may eat it, as you would eat a gazelle or a deer. 16 But you must not eat the blood; you should pour it out on the ground like water. 17 You will not be allowed to eat within your cities the tenth part of your grain, your new wine, your oil, the firstborn of your herd and flock, any of your vow offerings that you vow, your voluntary offerings, or the contribution from your hand. 18 These you are to eat before Jehovah your God in the place Jehovah your God will choose—you and your son, your daughter, your male and female servant, and the Levite inside your cities; and you will rejoice before Jehovah your God in all your undertakings. 19 Be careful not to neglect the Levite as long as you live in your land.20 “When Jehovah your God enlarges your territory, just as he has promised you, and you say, ‘I want to eat meat,’ because you desire to eat meat, you may eat meat whenever you desire it. 21 If the place that Jehovah your God chooses to put his name is far away from you, you should then slaughter some of your herd or some of your flock that Jehovah has given you, just as I have commanded you, and you should eat inside your cities whenever you desire it. 22 You may eat it as you would eat the gazelle and the deer; both the unclean person and the clean person may eat it. 23 Just be firmly resolved not to eat the blood, because the blood is the life, and you must not eat the life with the flesh. 24 You must not eat it. You should pour it out on the ground like water. 25 You must not eat it, so that it may go well with you and your children after you, because you are doing what is right in Jehovah’s eyes. 26 You should take only the holy things that are yours and your vow offerings when you come to the place that Jehovah will choose. 27 There you will offer your burnt offerings, the flesh and the blood, on the altar of Jehovah your God, and the blood of your sacrifices should be poured out against the altar of Jehovah your God, but the flesh you may eat.28 “Be careful to obey all these words that I am commanding you, so that it may always go well with you and your sons after you, because you are doing what is good and right in the eyes of Jehovah your God.29 “When Jehovah your God annihilates the nations that you are to dispossess, and you are living in their land, 30 be careful not to be entrapped after they have been annihilated from before you. Do not ask about their gods, saying, ‘How were these nations accustomed to serve their gods? I too will do the same.’ 31 You must not do this to Jehovah your God, because they do for their gods every detestable thing that Jehovah hates, even burning their sons and their daughters in the fire to their gods. 32 Every word that I am commanding you is what you should be careful to do. You must not add to it nor take away from it.
13 “In case a prophet or one who foretells by dreams arises in your midst and gives you a sign or a portent, 2 and the sign or the portent about which he spoke to you comes true while he is saying, ‘Let us walk after other gods, gods that you have not known, and let us serve them,’ 3 you must not listen to the words of that prophet or that dreamer, for Jehovah your God is testing you to know whether you love Jehovah your God with all your heart and all your soul. 4 After Jehovah your God you should walk, him you should fear, his commandments you should keep, to his voice you should listen; he is the one you should serve, and to him you should hold fast. 5 But that prophet or that dreamer should be put to death, because he encouraged rebellion against Jehovah your God—who brought you out of the land of Egypt and redeemed you from the house of slavery—to turn you from the way in which Jehovah your God has commanded you to walk. And you must remove what is evil from your midst.6 “If your brother, the son of your mother, or your son or your daughter or your cherished wife or your closest companion should try to entice you in secrecy, saying, ‘Let us go and serve other gods,’ gods that neither you nor your forefathers have known, 7 from the gods of the peoples all around you, whether near you or those far away from you, from one end of the land to the other end of the land, 8 you must not give in to him or listen to him, nor should you show pity or feel compassion or protect him; 9 instead, you should kill him without fail. Your hand should be the first to come upon him to put him to death, and the hand of all the people afterward. 10 And you must stone him to death, because he has sought to turn you away from Jehovah your God, who has brought you out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of slavery. 11 Then all Israel will hear and become afraid, and they will never again do anything bad like this among you.12 “In case you hear it said in one of your cities that Jehovah your God is giving you to occupy, 13 ‘Good-for-nothing men have gone out among you to turn away the inhabitants of their city, saying: “Let us go and serve other gods,” gods that you have not known,’ 14 you should look into the matter, making a thorough investigation and inquiry; and if it is confirmed to be true that this detestable thing has been done among you, 15 you should without fail strike down the inhabitants of that city with the sword. Devote it and everything that is in it, including its livestock, to destruction by the sword. 16 You should then collect all its spoil into the middle of its public square and burn the city with fire, and its spoil will serve as a whole offering to Jehovah your God. It will become a permanent heap of ruins. It should never be rebuilt. 17 Your hand should take nothing that was set apart for destruction, so that Jehovah may turn away from his burning anger and show you mercy and compassion and multiply you, just as he has sworn to your forefathers. 18 For you should obey Jehovah your God by keeping all his commandments that I am commanding you today, thus doing what is right in the eyes of Jehovah your God.
14 “You are sons of Jehovah your God. Do not cut yourselves or shave your foreheads bald for a dead person. 2 For you are a holy people to Jehovah your God, and Jehovah has chosen you to become his people, his special property, out of all the peoples who are on the face of the earth.3 “You must not eat anything that is detestable. 4 These are the animals that you may eat: the bull, the sheep, the goat, 5 the deer, the gazelle, the roebuck, the wild goat, the antelope, the wild sheep, and the mountain sheep. 6 You may eat any animal that has a split hoof divided into two and that chews the cud. 7 However, you must not eat the following animals that chew the cud or that have split hooves: the camel, the hare, and the rock badger, because they chew the cud but do not have split hooves. They are unclean for you. 8 Also the pig because it has a split hoof but does not chew the cud. It is unclean for you. You must not eat their flesh or touch their carcasses.9 “Of everything that is living in the waters, you may eat these: Anything with fins and scales, you may eat. 10 But you must not eat anything that has no fins and scales. It is unclean for you.11 “You may eat any clean bird. 12 But you must not eat these: the eagle, the osprey, the black vulture, 13 the red kite, the black kite, every kind of glede, 14 every kind of raven, 15 the ostrich, the owl, the gull, every kind of falcon, 16 the little owl, the long-eared owl, the swan, 17 the pelican, the vulture, the cormorant, 18 the stork, every kind of heron, the hoopoe, and the bat. 19 Every winged swarming creature also is unclean for you. They should not be eaten. 20 Any clean flying creature you may eat.21 “You must not eat any animal that was found dead. You may give it to the foreign resident who is inside your cities, and he may eat it, or it may be sold to a foreigner. For you are a holy people to Jehovah your God.“You must not boil a young goat in its mother’s milk.22 “You must without fail give a tenth of everything your seed produces in the field year by year. 23 You will eat the tenth part of your grain, your new wine, your oil, and the firstborn of your herd and your flock before Jehovah your God in the place that he chooses to have his name reside, so that you may learn to fear Jehovah your God always.24 “But if the journey should be too long for you and you are not able to carry it to the place that Jehovah your God chooses as the place for his name because it is far away from you (because Jehovah your God will bless you), 25 you may then convert it into money, and with your money in hand, travel to the place that Jehovah your God will choose. 26 You may then spend the money on whatever you desire—cattle, sheep, goats, wine and other alcoholic beverages, and anything you please; and you will eat there before Jehovah your God and rejoice, you and your household. 27 And do not neglect the Levite who is inside your cities, for he has no share or inheritance with you.28 “At the end of every three years, you should bring out the entire tenth part of your produce for that year and deposit it inside your cities. 29 Then the Levite, who has no share or inheritance with you, the foreign resident, the fatherless child, and the widow who are in your cities will come and eat their fill, so that Jehovah your God may bless you in all that you do.
15 “At the end of every seven years, you should grant a release. 2 This is the nature of the release: Every creditor will release his neighbor from the debt he incurred. He should not demand payment from his neighbor or his brother, for it will be proclaimed a release to Jehovah. 3 You may demand payment from the foreigner, but you should release your claim on whatever your brother owes you. 4 However, no one among you should become poor, for Jehovah will surely bless you in the land that Jehovah your God is giving you to possess as an inheritance, 5 but only if you strictly obey the voice of Jehovah your God and carefully observe all this commandment that I am giving you today. 6 For Jehovah your God will bless you just as he has promised you, and you will lend to many nations, but you will not need to borrow; and you will dominate many nations, but they will not dominate you.7 “If one of your brothers becomes poor among you in one of your cities of the land that Jehovah your God is giving you, do not harden your heart or be tightfisted toward your poor brother. 8 For you should generously open your hand to him and by all means lend whatever he needs or is lacking. 9 Be careful not to harbor this evil idea in your heart, ‘The seventh year, the year of the release, has approached,’ and hold back your generosity toward your poor brother and give him nothing. If he calls out to Jehovah against you, it will be a sin on your part. 10 You should generously give to him, and you should not give to him grudgingly, for this is why Jehovah your God will bless your every deed and undertaking. 11 For there will always be poor people in the land. That is why I am commanding you, ‘You should generously open up your hand to your afflicted and poor brother in your land.’12 “If one of your brothers, a Hebrew man or woman, is sold to you and has served you for six years, then in the seventh year you should set him free. 13 And if you should set him free, do not send him away empty-handed. 14 You should supply him generously with something from your flock, your threshing floor, and your press for oil and wine. Just as Jehovah your God has blessed you, you should give to him. 15 Remember that you became a slave in the land of Egypt and that Jehovah your God redeemed you. That is why I am commanding you to do this today.16 “But if he says to you, ‘I will not go out from your company!’ because he loves you and your household, since he has been happy while with you, 17 you should then take an awl and put it through his ear into the door, and he will become your slave for life. You should do the same with your slave girl. 18 Do not consider it a hardship when you set him free and he leaves you, because his service to you for six years was worth twice as much as that of a hired worker, and Jehovah your God has blessed you in everything that was done.19 “You should sanctify every firstborn male of your herd and your flock to Jehovah your God. You must not do any work with the firstborn of your herd nor shear the firstborn of your flock. 20 You and your household should eat it before Jehovah your God year by year in the place that Jehovah will choose. 21 But if it has a defect—lameness, blindness, or any other serious defect—you must not sacrifice it to Jehovah your God. 22 You should eat it inside your cities, the unclean and clean person together, as though it were a gazelle or a deer. 23 But you must not eat its blood; you should pour it out on the ground like water.
16 “Observe the month of Aʹbib, and celebrate the Passover to Jehovah your God, for in the month of Aʹbib, Jehovah your God brought you out of Egypt by night. 2 And you should sacrifice the Passover offering to Jehovah your God, from the flock and the herd, in the place that Jehovah chooses to have his name reside. 3 You must not eat anything leavened along with it; for seven days you should eat unleavened bread, the bread of affliction, because you came out of the land of Egypt in haste. Do this so that you may remember the day you came out of the land of Egypt as long as you live. 4 No sourdough should be found with you in all your territory for seven days, nor should any of the meat that you will sacrifice in the evening on the first day remain all night until the next morning. 5 You will not be allowed to sacrifice the Passover offering in just any of the cities that Jehovah your God is giving you. 6 But it should be done at the place that Jehovah your God chooses to have his name reside. You should sacrifice the Passover offering in the evening as soon as the sun sets, at the appointed time of your coming out of Egypt. 7 You must cook it and eat it in the place that Jehovah your God will choose, and in the morning you may return to your own tents. 8 Six days you should eat unleavened bread, and on the seventh day there will be a solemn assembly to Jehovah your God. You must do no work.9 “You should count off seven weeks. You should begin counting off seven weeks from the time you first put the sickle to the standing grain. 10 Then you are to celebrate the Festival of Weeks to Jehovah your God with the voluntary offering from your hand, given in proportion to how Jehovah your God blesses you. 11 And you are to rejoice before Jehovah your God, you and your son, your daughter, your male slave, your female slave, the Levite who is inside your cities, the foreign resident, the fatherless child, and the widow, who are in your midst, in the place that Jehovah your God chooses to have his name reside. 12 Remember that you became a slave in Egypt, and observe and carry out these regulations.13 “You should celebrate the Festival of Booths for seven days when you make an ingathering from your threshing floor and from your press for oil and wine. 14 Rejoice during your festival, you and your son, your daughter, your male slave, your female slave, the Levite, the foreign resident, the fatherless child, and the widow, who are inside your cities. 15 Seven days you will celebrate the festival to Jehovah your God in the place that Jehovah chooses, for Jehovah your God will bless all your produce and all that you do, and you will become nothing but joyful.16 “Three times a year, all your males should appear before Jehovah your God in the place that he chooses: at the Festival of Unleavened Bread, the Festival of Weeks, and the Festival of Booths, and none of them should appear before Jehovah empty-handed. 17 The gift that each one brings should be in proportion to the blessing that Jehovah your God has given you.18 “You should appoint judges and officers for each tribe in all the cities that Jehovah your God is giving you, and they must judge the people with righteous judgment. 19 You must not pervert justice, show partiality, or accept a bribe, for the bribe blinds the eyes of the wise and distorts the words of the righteous. 20 Justice—justice you should pursue, so that you may keep living and take possession of the land that Jehovah your God is giving you.21 “You should not plant any sort of tree as a sacred pole near the altar of Jehovah your God that you make for yourself.22 “Neither should you set up a sacred pillar for yourself, something Jehovah your God hates.
17 “You must not sacrifice to Jehovah your God a bull or a sheep that has a defect or anything wrong with it, for it would be detestable to Jehovah your God.2 “Suppose a man or a woman is found among you, in any of your cities that Jehovah your God is giving you, who is practicing what is bad in the eyes of Jehovah your God and violating his covenant, 3 and he goes astray and worships other gods and he bows down to them or to the sun or the moon or all the army of the heavens, a thing that I have not commanded. 4 When it is reported to you or you hear about it, then you should investigate the matter thoroughly. If it is confirmed to be true that this detestable thing has been done in Israel, 5 you must bring the man or the woman who has done this evil thing out to the city gates, and the man or the woman must be stoned to death. 6 On the testimony of two witnesses or of three witnesses the one who is to die should be put to death. He must not be put to death on the testimony of one witness. 7 The hand of the witnesses should be the first to come against him to put him to death, and the hand of all the people afterward. You must remove what is bad from your midst.8 “If a case arises in one of your cities that is too difficult for you to judge, whether it is a case involving bloodshed or a legal claim that has been raised or a violent deed that has been committed or other matters of dispute, you should rise up and go to the place that Jehovah your God chooses. 9 Go to the Levitical priests and to the judge serving in those days, and make your inquiry, and they will hand down the decision to you. 10 Then you must act according to the decision that they hand down to you from the place that Jehovah chooses. Be careful to do according to all that they instruct you. 11 You must act according to the law that they show you and according to the decision that they declare to you. Do not deviate from the decision that they will hand down to you, either to the right or to the left. 12 The man who acts presumptuously by not listening to the priest who is ministering to Jehovah your God or to the judge must die. You must remove what is bad from Israel. 13 All the people will then hear and become afraid, and they will not act presumptuously anymore.14 “When you enter the land that Jehovah your God is giving you and you have taken possession of it and are living in it, and you say, ‘Let me appoint a king over myself like all the nations around me,’ 15 in that case, you should without fail appoint a king whom Jehovah your God chooses. You should appoint a king from among your brothers. You are forbidden to appoint over yourself a foreigner who is not your brother. 16 However, he should not acquire many horses for himself or make the people go back to Egypt in order to obtain more horses, since Jehovah told you, ‘You must never go back again by this way.’ 17 Neither should he take many wives for himself, so that his heart may not go astray; nor should he acquire vast amounts of silver and gold for himself. 18 When he takes his seat on the throne of his kingdom, he must write for himself in a book a copy of this Law, taken from the one kept by the Levitical priests.19 “It is to remain with him, and he must read from it all the days of his life, so that he may learn to fear Jehovah his God and observe all the words of this Law and these regulations by carrying them out. 20 Thus his heart will not exalt itself above his brothers, and he will not deviate from the commandment, either to the right or to the left, so that he may remain a long time over his kingdom, he and his sons in the midst of Israel.
18 “The Levitical priests, and indeed the entire tribe of Leʹvi, will have no share or inheritance with Israel. They will eat of the offerings made by fire to Jehovah, which are his inheritance. 2 So they should have no inheritance in the midst of their brothers. Jehovah is their inheritance, just as he has spoken to them.3 “Now this will be the due right of the priests from the people: Whoever makes a sacrifice, whether a bull or a sheep, is to give the shoulder, the jaws, and the stomach to the priest. 4 The firstfruits of your grain, your new wine, your oil, and the first wool that is shorn from your flock you should give him. 5 Jehovah your God has chosen him and his sons from all your tribes to minister in the name of Jehovah always.6 “But if a Levite leaves one of your cities in Israel where he was living and he desires to go to the place that Jehovah chooses, 7 he may minister there in the name of Jehovah his God the same as all his brothers, the Levites, who are stationed there before Jehovah. 8 He will receive an equal share of food with them, in addition to what he receives from selling his ancestral possessions.9 “When you have entered into the land that Jehovah your God is giving you, you must not learn to imitate the detestable practices of those nations. 10 There should not be found in you anyone who makes his son or his daughter pass through the fire, anyone who employs divination, anyone practicing magic, anyone who looks for omens, a sorcerer, 11 anyone binding others with a spell, anyone who consults a spirit medium or a fortune-teller, or anyone who inquires of the dead. 12 For whoever does these things is detestable to Jehovah, and on account of these detestable practices Jehovah your God is driving them away from before you. 13 You should prove yourself blameless before Jehovah your God.14 “For these nations that you are dispossessing used to listen to those practicing magic and divination, but Jehovah your God has not allowed you to do anything like this. 15 Jehovah your God will raise up for you from among your brothers a prophet like me. You must listen to him. 16 This is in response to what you asked of Jehovah your God in Hoʹreb on the day of the assembly when you said, ‘Do not let me hear the voice of Jehovah my God or see this great fire anymore, so that I do not die.’ 17 Then Jehovah said to me, ‘What they have said is good. 18 I will raise up for them from the midst of their brothers a prophet like you, and I will put my words in his mouth, and he will speak to them all that I command him. 19 Indeed, I will require an account from the man who will not listen to my words that he will speak in my name.20 “‘If any prophet presumptuously speaks a word in my name that I did not command him to speak or speaks in the name of other gods, that prophet must die. 21 However, you may say in your heart: “How will we know that Jehovah has not spoken the word?” 22 When the prophet speaks in the name of Jehovah and the word is not fulfilled or does not come true, then Jehovah did not speak that word. The prophet spoke it presumptuously. You should not fear him.’
19 “When Jehovah your God destroys the nations whose land Jehovah your God is giving you and you have dispossessed them and have settled in their cities and their houses, 2 you should set apart three cities in the midst of your land that Jehovah your God is giving you to possess. 3 You should divide the territory of the land that Jehovah your God has given you to possess into three parts, and prepare the roads so that any manslayer can flee to one of those cities.4 “Now this is what should take place regarding the manslayer who may flee there in order to live: When he strikes his fellow man unintentionally and he did not previously hate him; 5 as when he goes with his fellow man into the forest to gather wood and he raises his hand to cut the tree with the ax, but the axhead flies off the handle and hits his fellow man and he dies, the manslayer should flee to one of these cities to live. 6 Otherwise, in the heat of anger, the avenger of blood may chase after the manslayer, overtake him, and kill him, because the distance to the city was too far. However, he did not deserve to die, since he did not previously hate his fellow man. 7 That is why I am commanding you: ‘Set three cities apart.’8 “If Jehovah your God enlarges your territory as he swore to your forefathers and he has given you all the land that he promised to give to your forefathers 9 —provided you faithfully observe all this commandment that I am giving you today, to love Jehovah your God and always to walk in his ways—then you are to add three other cities to these three. 10 In this way no innocent blood will be spilled in your land that Jehovah your God is giving you as an inheritance, and no bloodguilt will come upon you.11 “But if a man hated his fellow man and he was waiting to attack him and he fatally wounded him and he died, and the man has fled to one of these cities, 12 the elders of his city should then summon him from there and deliver him into the hand of the avenger of blood, and he must die. 13 You should not feel sorry for him, and you must remove the guilt of innocent blood out of Israel, so that it may go well for you.14 “When you receive your inheritance in the land that Jehovah your God is giving you to possess, you must not move your neighbor’s boundary marker from the place where the ancestors set the boundaries.15 “No single witness may convict another for any error or any sin that he may commit. On the testimony of two witnesses or on the testimony of three witnesses the matter should be established. 16 If a malicious witness testifies against a man and charges him with some transgression, 17 the two men who have the dispute will stand before Jehovah, before the priests and the judges who will be serving in those days. 18 The judges will thoroughly investigate, and if the man who testified is a false witness and has brought a false charge against his brother, 19 you should do to him just as he had schemed to do to his brother, and you must remove what is bad from your midst. 20 Those who remain will hear and be afraid, and they will never again do anything bad like this among you. 21 You should not feel sorry: Life will be for life, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot.
2 “Then we turned and departed for the wilderness by the way of the Red Sea, just as Jehovah had told me, and we traveled for many days around Mount Seʹir. 2 Finally Jehovah said to me, 3 ‘You have gone around this mountain long enough. Now turn north. 4 And give this command to the people: “You will pass by the border of your brothers, the descendants of Eʹsau, who are dwelling in Seʹir, and they will be afraid of you, and you must be very careful. 5 Do not engage in hostilities with them, for I will not give you any of their land, not even the space of a footprint, because I have given Mount Seʹir to Eʹsau as his possession. 6 You should give them money for the food you will eat, and you should pay for the water you will drink. 7 For Jehovah your God has blessed you in all that you have done. He is fully aware of your walking through this great wilderness. These 40 years Jehovah your God has been with you, and you have lacked nothing.”’ 8 So we passed by our brothers, the descendants of Eʹsau, who are dwelling in Seʹir, keeping away from the way of the Arʹa·bah, from Eʹlath and from Eʹzi·on-geʹber.“Next we turned and traveled by the way of the wilderness of Moʹab. 9 Jehovah then said to me, ‘Do not engage in hostilities or in war with Moʹab, for I will not give you any of his land as a possession because I have given Ar as a possession to the descendants of Lot. 10 (The Eʹmim formerly lived there, a people great and numerous and tall like the Anʹa·kim. 11 The Rephʹa·im were also considered like the Anʹa·kim, and the Moʹab·ites used to call them Eʹmim. 12 Previously, the Horʹites were living in Seʹir, but the descendants of Eʹsau dispossessed and annihilated them and settled in their place, just as Israel will do to the land that is their possession, which Jehovah will certainly give to them.) 13 Now go and cross over the Valley of Zeʹred.’ So we crossed over the Valley of Zeʹred. 14 The time it took us to walk from Kaʹdesh-barʹne·a until we crossed the Valley of Zeʹred was 38 years, until the entire generation of the men of war had perished from the camp, just as Jehovah had sworn to them. 15 Jehovah’s hand was against them to eliminate them from the camp until they had perished.16 “As soon as all the men of war had died off from among the people, 17 Jehovah spoke to me again, saying, 18 ‘Today you are to pass by the territory of Moʹab, that is, Ar. 19 When you come near to the Amʹmon·ites, do not harass or provoke them, for I will not give you any of the land of the Amʹmon·ites as a possession, because I have given it to the descendants of Lot as their possession. 20 This too used to be considered the land of the Rephʹa·im. (The Rephʹa·im formerly lived there, and the Amʹmon·ites used to call them Zam·zumʹmim. 21 They were a great and numerous and tall people like the Anʹa·kim; but Jehovah annihilated them before the Amʹmon·ites, and these drove them out and settled in their place. 22 That is what he did for the descendants of Eʹsau, who now dwell in Seʹir, when he annihilated the Horʹites from before them, so that they could dispossess them and dwell in their place to this very day. 23 As for the Avʹvim, they had dwelled in settlements as far as Gazʹa until the Caphʹto·rim, who came out from Caphʹtor, annihilated them and settled in their place.)24 “‘Get up, and make your way across the Arʹnon Valley. See, I have given into your hand Siʹhon the Amʹor·ite, king of Heshʹbon. So begin taking possession of his land, and engage him in war. 25 This day I will start to put the dread and the fear of you upon all the people under the heavens who hear the report about you. They will be disturbed and will tremble because of you.’26 “Then I sent messengers from the wilderness of Kedʹe·moth to King Siʹhon of Heshʹbon, with these peaceful words, 27 ‘Let me pass through your land. I will remain on the road and not turn to the right or to the left. 28 I will eat only the food and drink only the water that you will sell to me. Just allow me to pass through on foot 29 —that is what the descendants of Eʹsau dwelling in Seʹir and the Moʹab·ites dwelling in Ar did for me—until I pass over the Jordan into the land that Jehovah our God is giving to us.’ 30 But King Siʹhon of Heshʹbon did not let us pass through, because Jehovah your God allowed his spirit to become obstinate and his heart to become hard, in order to give him into your hand as is now the case.31 “Then Jehovah said to me, ‘See, I have already begun to give Siʹhon and his land over to you. Start to take possession of his land.’ 32 When Siʹhon came out along with all his people to meet us in battle at Jaʹhaz, 33 Jehovah our God handed him over to us, so that we defeated him, his sons, and all his people. 34 We captured all his cities at that time and devoted every city to destruction, including men, women, and children. We left no survivor. 35 We plundered only the livestock for ourselves along with the spoils from the cities that we had captured. 36 From A·roʹer, which is on the rim of the Arʹnon Valley (including the city that is in the valley), as far as Gilʹe·ad, no town was beyond our reach. Jehovah our God handed them all over to us. 37 However, you did not approach the land of the Amʹmon·ites, the whole bank of the Valley of Jabʹbok and the cities of the mountainous region, or any other place forbidden by Jehovah our God.
20 “If you go to war against your enemies and you see their horses and chariots and troops that outnumber yours, do not be afraid of them, for Jehovah your God who brought you up out of the land of Egypt is with you. 2 When you are about to go into battle, the priest should approach and address the people. 3 He should tell them, ‘Hear, O Israel, you are about to do battle with your enemies. Do not be fainthearted. Do not be afraid or be terrified or tremble because of them, 4 for Jehovah your God is marching with you to fight for you against your enemies and to save you.’5 “The officers too should tell the people, ‘Who has built a new house and has not inaugurated it? Let him return to his house. Otherwise, he may die in the battle and another man will inaugurate it. 6 And who has planted a vineyard and not begun to use it? Let him go and return to his house. Otherwise, he may die in the battle and another man will begin to use it. 7 And who has become engaged to a woman and has not married her? Let him go and return to his house. Otherwise, he might die in the battle and another man will marry her.’ 8 The officers should also ask the people, ‘Who is fearful and fainthearted? He should return to his house, so that he may not cause his brothers to lose heart as he has.’ 9 When the officers have finished speaking to the people, they should appoint chiefs of the armies to lead the people.10 “If you approach a city to fight against it, you should also announce to it terms of peace. 11 If it gives a peaceful answer to you and opens up to you, all the people found there will become yours for forced labor, and they will serve you. 12 But if it refuses to make peace with you and instead goes to war with you, you should besiege it, 13 and Jehovah your God will certainly give it into your hand, and you must strike down every male in it with the sword. 14 However, the women, the children, the livestock, and everything that is in the city, all its spoil, you may plunder for yourself, and you will eat the spoil of your enemies, which Jehovah your God has given to you.15 “That is what you will do to all the cities very far away from you that are not of the cities of these nearby nations. 16 But in the cities of these peoples, which Jehovah your God is giving you as an inheritance, you must not allow any breathing thing to live. 17 Instead, you should devote them completely to destruction, the Hitʹtites, the Amʹor·ites, the Caʹnaan·ites, the Perʹiz·zites, the Hiʹvites, and the Jebʹu·sites, just as Jehovah your God has commanded you; 18 so that they may not teach you to follow all their detestable practices that they have done for their gods, causing you to sin against Jehovah your God.19 “If you lay siege to a city and capture it after fighting against it for many days, you should not destroy its trees by wielding an ax against them. You may eat from them, but you should not cut them down. For should you besiege a tree of the field as you would a man? 20 You may destroy only a tree that you know is not used for food. You may cut it down and build siegeworks against the city that is making war against you, until it falls.
21 “If someone is found slain in a field of the land that Jehovah your God is giving you to possess and it is not known who killed him, 2 your elders and judges should go out and measure the distance from the dead body to the cities that surround it. 3 Then the elders of the city nearest to the body should take from the herd a young cow that has never been put to work, that has never pulled in a yoke, 4 and the elders of that city should lead the young cow down to a valley running with water where no tilling or sowing of seed has been done, and they should break the neck of the young cow there in the valley.5 “And the priests, the Levites, will approach because Jehovah your God has chosen them to minister to him, to pronounce blessings in the name of Jehovah. They will declare how every dispute involving violence should be resolved. 6 Then all the elders of the city who are nearest to the dead body should wash their hands over the young cow whose neck was broken in the valley, 7 and they should declare, ‘Our hands did not shed this blood, nor did our eyes see it shed. 8 Do not hold this against your people Israel, whom you redeemed, O Jehovah, and do not let guilt for innocent blood remain among your people Israel.’ Then the bloodguilt will not be held against them. 9 In this way you will remove the guilt of innocent blood from your midst by doing what is right in Jehovah’s eyes.10 “If you go to war against your enemies and Jehovah your God defeats them for you and you take them captive, 11 and you see among the captives a beautiful woman and you are attracted to her and you want to take her as your wife, 12 you may bring her into your house. She should then shave her head, attend to her nails, 13 and remove the clothing of her captivity, and dwell in your house. She will weep for her father and her mother a whole month, and afterward you may have relations with her; you will become her husband and she will become your wife. 14 But if you are not pleased with her, you should then let her go wherever she wishes. But you may not sell her for money or treat her harshly, since you have humiliated her.15 “If a man has two wives and he loves one more than the other and both have borne sons to him and the firstborn son belongs to the unloved one, 16 on the day that he gives his inheritance to his sons, he will not be allowed to treat the son of the loved one as his firstborn at the expense of the son of the unloved one, the firstborn. 17 He should recognize as the firstborn the unloved one’s son by giving him the double portion of everything he has, for that one is the beginning of his procreative power. The right of the firstborn’s position belongs to him.18 “If a man has a son who is stubborn and rebellious and he does not obey his father or his mother, and they have tried to correct him but he refuses to listen to them, 19 his father and his mother should take hold of him and bring him out to the elders at the gate of his city 20 and say to the elders of his city, ‘This son of ours is stubborn and rebellious, and he refuses to obey us. He is a glutton and a drunkard.’ 21 Then all the men of his city must stone him to death. So you must remove what is bad from your midst, and all Israel will hear and become afraid.22 “If a man commits a sin deserving the sentence of death and he has been put to death and you have hung him on a stake, 23 his dead body should not remain all night on the stake. Instead, you should be sure to bury him on that day, because the one hung up is something accursed of God, and you should not defile your land that Jehovah your God is giving you as an inheritance.
22 “If you see your brother’s bull or his sheep going astray, do not deliberately ignore it. You should without fail lead it back to your brother. 2 But if your brother does not live near you or you do not know him, you should bring the animal to your house, and it will remain with you until your brother searches for it. Then you should return it to him. 3 That is what you should do with his donkey, with his clothing, and with anything that your brother has lost and you have found. You must not ignore it.4 “If you see your brother’s donkey or his bull fall down on the road, you must not deliberately ignore it. You should without fail help him raise the animal up.5 “A woman must not put on the clothing of a man, nor should a man wear the clothing of a woman. For anyone doing so is detestable to Jehovah your God.6 “If you happen upon a bird’s nest along the road with young ones or eggs, whether in a tree or on the ground, and the mother is sitting on the young ones or the eggs, you must not take the mother together with her young. 7 Be sure to send the mother away, but you may take the young for yourself. Do this so that it may go well with you and you may live long.8 “If you build a new house, you must also make a parapet for your roof, so that you may not bring bloodguilt on your house because of someone falling from it.9 “You must not sow your vineyard with two sorts of seed. Otherwise, everything produced from the seed you sow as well as the product of the vineyard will be forfeited to the sanctuary.10 “You must not plow with a bull and a donkey together.11 “You must not wear clothing made of wool and linen mixed together.12 “You should make tassels on the four corners of the clothing you wear.13 “If a man takes a wife and has relations with her but then comes to hate her 14 and he accuses her of misconduct and gives her a bad name by saying: ‘I have taken this woman, but when I had relations with her, I did not find evidence that she was a virgin,’ 15 the father and mother of the girl should produce the evidence of the girl’s virginity for the elders at the gate of the city. 16 The girl’s father must say to the elders, ‘I gave my daughter to this man as a wife, but he hates her 17 and is accusing her of misconduct by saying: “I have found out that your daughter does not have evidence of virginity.” Now this is the evidence of my daughter’s virginity.’ They will then spread out the cloth before the elders of the city. 18 The city elders will take the man and discipline him. 19 They will fine him 100 silver shekels and give them to the girl’s father, because the man defamed a virgin of Israel, and she will continue to be his wife. He will not be allowed to divorce her as long as he lives.20 “If, though, the accusation is true, and there is no evidence that the girl was a virgin, 21 they should bring the girl out to the entrance of her father’s house, and the men of her city should stone her to death, because she has committed a disgraceful act in Israel by committing sexual immorality in the house of her father. So you must remove what is bad from your midst.22 “If a man is found lying down with a woman who is the wife of another man, both of them must die together, the man who lay down with the woman as well as the woman. So you must remove what is bad out of Israel.23 “If a virgin is engaged to a man, and another man happens to meet her in the city and lies down with her, 24 you should bring them both out to the gate of that city and stone them to death, the girl because she did not scream in the city and the man because he humiliated the wife of his fellow man. So you must remove what is evil from your midst.25 “If, however, the man happened to meet the engaged girl in the field and the man overpowered her and lay down with her, the man who lay down with her is to die by himself, 26 and you must do nothing to the girl. The girl has not committed a sin deserving of death. This case is the same as when a man attacks his fellow man and murders him. 27 For he happened to meet her in the field, and the engaged girl screamed, but there was no one to rescue her.28 “If a man happens to meet a virgin girl who is not engaged and he seizes her and lies down with her and they are discovered, 29 the man who lay down with her must give the girl’s father 50 silver shekels, and she will become his wife. Because he humiliated her, he will not be allowed to divorce her as long as he lives.30 “No man should take his father’s wife, so that he may not dishonor his father.
23 “No man who has been castrated by having his testicles crushed or who has had his male organ cut off may come into the congregation of Jehovah.2 “No illegitimate son may come into the congregation of Jehovah. Even to the tenth generation, none of his descendants may come into the congregation of Jehovah.3 “No Amʹmon·ite or Moʹab·ite may come into the congregation of Jehovah. Even to the tenth generation, none of their descendants may ever come into the congregation of Jehovah, 4 because they did not come to your aid with food and water when you were on the way going out of Egypt, and because they hired against you Baʹlaam the son of Beʹor from Peʹthor of Mes·o·po·taʹmi·a to curse you. 5 But Jehovah your God refused to listen to Baʹlaam. Rather, Jehovah your God changed the curse into a blessing for you, because Jehovah your God loved you. 6 You should never seek their welfare or their prosperity all your days.7 “You must not hate an Eʹdom·ite, for he is your brother.“You must not hate an Egyptian, for you became a foreign resident in his country. 8 The third generation of children born to them may enter the congregation of Jehovah.9 “When you are encamped against your enemies, you should avoid anything bad. 10 If a man becomes unclean because of a nocturnal emission, he should go outside the camp and not reenter the camp. 11 When evening falls, he should wash with water, and then he may return to the camp at sunset. 12 A private place should be designated for use outside the camp, and there is where you should go. 13 A peg should be part of your equipment. When you squat outside, you should dig a hole with it and then cover your excrement. 14 For Jehovah your God is walking about within your camp to deliver you and to hand over your enemies to you, and your camp must be holy, so that he does not see anything indecent in you and turn away from accompanying you.15 “You should not hand over a slave to his master when he escapes from his master and comes to you. 16 He may dwell among you in whatever place he chooses in one of your cities, wherever he likes. You must not mistreat him.17 “None of the daughters of Israel may become a temple prostitute, neither may anyone of the sons of Israel become a temple prostitute. 18 You must not bring the price paid to a female prostitute or the price paid to a male prostitute into the house of Jehovah your God to fulfill a vow, for both of them are something detestable to Jehovah your God.19 “You must not make your brother pay interest, whether interest on money, on food, or on anything on which interest may be charged. 20 You may make a foreigner pay interest, but you must not make your brother pay interest, so that Jehovah your God may bless you in every undertaking of yours in the land you are going to take possession of.21 “If you make a vow to Jehovah your God, do not be slow about paying it. For Jehovah your God will surely require it of you; otherwise, it will be a sin on your part. 22 But if you refrain from making a vow, you will not be guilty of sin. 23 The word of your lips you should keep, and you must carry out what your own mouth vowed as a voluntary offering to Jehovah your God.24 “If you enter your neighbor’s vineyard, you may eat enough grapes to satisfy your appetite, but you should not put any in your container.25 “If you go into your neighbor’s field of standing grain, you may pluck the ripe ears with your hand, but you should not put a sickle to your neighbor’s grain.
24 “If a man marries a woman but she does not please him because he found something indecent about her, he must write out a certificate of divorce for her, hand it to her, and dismiss her from his house. 2 After she leaves his house, she may go and become another man’s wife. 3 If the second man hates her and writes out a certificate of divorce for her, hands it to her, and dismisses her from his house or if the second man who married her should die, 4 her first husband who dismissed her will not be allowed to take her back again as his wife after she has been defiled, for that is something detestable to Jehovah. You must not bring sin into the land that Jehovah your God is giving you as an inheritance.5 “When a man is newly married, he should not serve in the army or be given any other duties. He should remain exempt for one year and stay at home and bring joy to his wife.6 “No one should seize a hand mill or its upper millstone as security for a loan, for that would be taking someone’s livelihood as security.7 “If someone is found to have kidnapped one of his Israelite brothers and he has mistreated him and sold him, the kidnapper must die. You should remove what is bad from your midst.8 “When there is an outbreak of leprosy, be very careful to do according to all that the Levitical priests will instruct you. Be careful to do exactly as I commanded them. 9 Remember what Jehovah your God did to Mirʹi·am on the way when you were coming out of Egypt.10 “If you make any sort of loan to your neighbor, you must not enter into his house to seize from him what he has offered as security. 11 You should stand outside, and the man who received the loan should bring outside to you what he is giving as security. 12 And if the man is in need, you must not go to bed with what he gave as security still in your possession. 13 You should by all means return to him what he has given as security as soon as the sun sets, and he will go to bed with his garment, and he will bless you; and it will mean righteousness for you before Jehovah your God.14 “You must not defraud a hired worker who is in need and poor, whether one of your brothers or a foreign resident in your land, within your cities. 15 You should give him his wages that very day, before the sun sets, because he is in need and his life depends on his wages. Otherwise, he will cry out to Jehovah against you, and you will be guilty of sin.16 “Fathers should not be put to death for what their children do, and children should not be put to death for what their fathers do. A person should be put to death only for his own sin.17 “You must not pervert the judgment of the foreign resident or of the fatherless child, and you must not seize the garment of a widow as security for a loan. 18 Remember that you became a slave in Egypt, and Jehovah your God redeemed you from there. That is why I am commanding you to do this.19 “When you reap your harvest from your field and you have forgotten a sheaf in the field, do not go back to get it. It should be left for the foreign resident, the fatherless child, and the widow, so that Jehovah your God may bless you in all that you do.20 “When you beat your olive tree, you should not repeat the procedure on its branches. What is left should remain for the foreign resident, the fatherless child, and the widow.21 “When you gather the grapes of your vineyard, you must not return to gather the leftovers. They should be left for the foreign resident, the fatherless child, and the widow. 22 Remember that you became a slave in the land of Egypt. That is why I am commanding you to do this.
25 “When a dispute arises between men, they may present themselves before the judges, and they will judge them and pronounce the righteous one innocent and the wicked one guilty. 2 If the wicked one deserves to be beaten, the judge will have him lie down prostrate, and he will be beaten in his presence. The number of strokes should correspond to the wickedness of his deed. 3 He may beat him with up to 40 strokes, but no more. If he would continue beating him with more strokes than this, your brother would be disgraced before your eyes.4 “You must not muzzle a bull when it is threshing out grain.5 “If brothers dwell together and one of them dies without having a son, the wife of the dead one should not marry someone from outside the family. Her brother-in-law should go to her, take her as his wife, and perform brother-in-law marriage with her. 6 The firstborn whom she will bear will carry on the name of his dead brother, so that his name may not be wiped out of Israel.7 “Now if the man does not want to marry his brother’s widow, his brother’s widow should then go to the elders at the city gate and say, ‘My husband’s brother has refused to preserve his brother’s name in Israel. He has not consented to perform brother-in-law marriage with me.’ 8 The elders of his city must call him and speak to him. Should he insist and say, ‘I do not want to marry her,’ 9 then his brother’s widow should approach him before the elders, remove his sandal from his foot, spit in his face, and say, ‘That is what should be done to the man who will not build up his brother’s household.’ 10 After that his family name in Israel will be known as ‘The house of the one who had his sandal removed.’11 “If two men get into a fight with each other and the wife of the one intervenes to protect her husband from the one striking him and she reaches out her hand and grabs hold of him by his private parts, 12 you must amputate her hand. You should not feel sorry.13 “You must not have in your bag two different stone weights, a large one and a small one. 14 You must not have in your house two different measuring containers, a large one and a small one. 15 You should keep an accurate and honest weight and an accurate and honest measure, so that you will live long in the land that Jehovah your God is giving you. 16 For every unjust person who does such things is detestable to Jehovah your God.17 “Remember what Amʹa·lek did to you on the way as you were coming out of Egypt, 18 how he met you along the way and attacked all those straggling behind you when you were exhausted and weary. He did not fear God. 19 When Jehovah your God has given you rest from all your enemies around you in the land that Jehovah your God is giving you as an inheritance to possess, you should wipe out the mention of Amʹa·lek from under the heavens. You must not forget.
26 “When eventually you enter into the land that Jehovah your God is giving you as an inheritance and you have taken possession of it and are dwelling in it, 2 you are to take some of the firstfruits of all the produce of the ground, which you will gather from your land that Jehovah your God is giving you, and put them in a basket and go to the place that Jehovah your God chooses to have his name reside. 3 You must go to the priest who will be serving in those days and say to him, ‘Today I am reporting to Jehovah your God that I have come into the land that Jehovah swore to our forefathers to give to us.’4 “The priest will then take the basket out of your hand and deposit it before the altar of Jehovah your God. 5 Then you are to declare before Jehovah your God, ‘My father was a wandering A·ra·maeʹan, and he went down to Egypt and resided there as a foreigner, with few in his household. But there he became a great nation, mighty and numerous. 6 And the Egyptians mistreated and oppressed us and imposed harsh slavery on us. 7 So we began to cry out to Jehovah, the God of our forefathers, and Jehovah heard our voice and looked upon our affliction and our trouble and our oppression. 8 Finally Jehovah brought us out of Egypt with a mighty hand and an outstretched arm and with terrifying deeds and with signs and miracles. 9 Then he brought us to this place and gave us this land, a land flowing with milk and honey. 10 Now I have brought the firstfruits of the produce of the ground that Jehovah has given me.’“You must deposit it before Jehovah your God and bow down before Jehovah your God. 11 You will then rejoice over all the good that Jehovah your God has given you and your household, you and the Levite and the foreign resident who is among you.12 “When you finish tithing the entire tenth of your produce in the third year, the year of the tenth, you will give it to the Levite, the foreign resident, the fatherless child, and the widow, and they will eat their fill within your cities. 13 You will then say before Jehovah your God, ‘I have cleared the holy portion out of my house and given it to the Levite, the foreign resident, the fatherless child, and the widow, just as you have commanded me. I have not violated or neglected your commandments. 14 I have not eaten of it while mourning or removed any of it while unclean or given any of it for the dead. I have obeyed the voice of Jehovah my God and have done all that you commanded me. 15 Now look down from your holy dwelling, the heavens, and bless your people Israel and the land that you have given us, just as you swore to our forefathers, the land flowing with milk and honey.’16 “This day Jehovah your God is commanding you to carry out these regulations and judicial decisions. You must observe them and carry them out with all your heart and all your soul. 17 Today you have obtained Jehovah’s declaration that he will become your God as you walk in his ways and observe his regulations, his commandments, and his judicial decisions, and as you listen to his voice. 18 And today Jehovah has obtained your declaration that you will become his people, his special property, just as he has promised you, and that you will observe all his commandments 19 and that he will put you high above all the other nations that he has made, giving you praise and fame and glory as you prove yourself a people holy to Jehovah your God, just as he has promised.”
27 Then Moses together with the elders of Israel commanded the people, saying: “Observe every commandment that I am giving you today. 2 And in the day when you will cross the Jordan into the land that Jehovah your God is giving you, set up large stones and cover them with plaster. 3 Then write on them all the words of this Law when you have crossed over, so that you may enter into the land that Jehovah your God is giving you, a land flowing with milk and honey, just as Jehovah, the God of your forefathers, has promised you. 4 When you have crossed the Jordan, you should set up these stones on Mount Eʹbal and cover them with plaster, just as I am commanding you today. 5 You are also to build an altar there to Jehovah your God, an altar of stones. You should not use iron tools on them. 6 You should build the altar of Jehovah your God with whole stones and offer burnt offerings to Jehovah your God on it. 7 You are to offer communion sacrifices and eat them there, and you will rejoice before Jehovah your God. 8 And clearly write on the stones all the words of this Law.”9 Then Moses and the Levitical priests spoke to all Israel, saying: “Keep silent and listen, O Israel. This day you have become the people of Jehovah your God. 10 You must listen to the voice of Jehovah your God and carry out his commandments and his regulations, which I am commanding you today.”11 On that day Moses commanded the people, saying: 12 “The following tribes will stand on Mount Gerʹi·zim to bless the people when you have crossed the Jordan: Simʹe·on, Leʹvi, Judah, Isʹsa·char, Joseph, and Benjamin. 13 And the following will stand on Mount Eʹbal to pronounce the curse: Reuʹben, Gad, Ashʹer, Zebʹu·lun, Dan, and Naphʹta·li. 14 And the Levites will answer every man of Israel with a loud voice:15 “‘Cursed is the man who makes a carved image or a metal statue, a thing detestable to Jehovah, the workmanship of the hands of a craftsman, and who has hidden it.’ (And all the people will respond, saying, ‘Amen!’)16 “‘Cursed is the one who treats his father or his mother with contempt.’ (And all the people will say, ‘Amen!’)17 “‘Cursed is the one who moves his neighbor’s boundary marker.’ (And all the people will say, ‘Amen!’)18 “‘Cursed is the one who causes a blind person to lose his way on the road.’ (And all the people will say, ‘Amen!’)19 “‘Cursed is the one who perverts the judgment of a foreign resident, a fatherless child, or a widow.’ (And all the people will say, ‘Amen!’)20 “‘Cursed is the one who lies down with his father’s wife, for he has dishonored his father.’ (And all the people will say, ‘Amen!’)21 “‘Cursed is the one who lies down with any animal.’ (And all the people will say, ‘Amen!’)22 “‘Cursed is the one who lies down with his sister, the daughter of his father or the daughter of his mother.’ (And all the people will say, ‘Amen!’)23 “‘Cursed is the one who lies down with his mother-in-law.’ (And all the people will say, ‘Amen!’)24 “‘Cursed is the one who ambushes and kills his neighbor.’ (And all the people will say, ‘Amen!’)25 “‘Cursed is the one who accepts a bribe to kill an innocent person.’ (And all the people will say, ‘Amen!’)26 “‘Cursed is the one who will not uphold the words of this Law by carrying them out.’ (And all the people will say, ‘Amen!’)
28 “And if you will without fail listen to the voice of Jehovah your God by being careful to do all his commandments that I am commanding you today, Jehovah your God will certainly put you high above all other nations of the earth. 2 All these blessings will come upon you and overtake you, because you keep listening to the voice of Jehovah your God:3 “Blessed you will be in the city, and blessed you will be in the field.4 “Blessed will be your children and the fruit of your ground and the offspring of your livestock, your young cattle and sheep.5 “Blessed will be your basket and your kneading bowl.6 “Blessed you will be when you come in, and blessed you will be when you go out.7 “Jehovah will cause your enemies who rise up against you to be defeated before you. They will attack you from one direction, but they will flee from you in seven different directions. 8 Jehovah will decree for you a blessing on your storehouses and every undertaking of yours, and he will certainly bless you in the land that Jehovah your God is giving you. 9 Jehovah will establish you as a holy people to himself, just as he swore to you, because you continue to keep the commandments of Jehovah your God and walk in his ways. 10 All the peoples of the earth will have to see that Jehovah’s name has been called upon you, and they will be afraid of you.11 “Jehovah will make you overflow with many children and much livestock and fruitful ground in the land that Jehovah swore to your forefathers to give you. 12 Jehovah will open up to you his good storehouse, the heavens, to give your land rain in its season and to bless all that you do. You will lend to many nations, while you yourself will not need to borrow. 13 Jehovah will make you the head, and not the tail; and you will be on top, and not on the bottom, if you keep obeying the commandments of Jehovah your God that I am commanding you today to observe and to do. 14 You must not deviate from all the words that I am commanding you today, to the right or to the left, to walk after other gods to serve them.15 “But if you will not listen to the voice of Jehovah your God by taking care to do all his commandments and his statutes that I am commanding you today, all these curses will come upon you and overtake you:16 “Cursed you will be in the city, and cursed you will be in the field.17 “Cursed will be your basket and your kneading bowl.18 “Cursed will be your children and the fruit of your ground and your young cattle and sheep.19 “Cursed you will be when you come in, and cursed you will be when you go out.20 “Jehovah will send upon you the curse, confusion and punishment in every undertaking of yours until you have been annihilated and have quickly perished, because of your bad practices and your forsaking me. 21 Jehovah will cause the disease to cling to you until he has exterminated you from the land you are going to take possession of. 22 Jehovah will strike you with tuberculosis, burning fever, inflammation, feverish heat, the sword, scorching blight, and mildew; and they will pursue you until you have perished. 23 The skies over your head will be copper, and the earth beneath you, iron. 24 Jehovah will make the rain of your land powder and dust that will come down on you from the heavens until you have been annihilated. 25 Jehovah will cause you to be defeated before your enemies. You will attack them from one direction, but you will flee from them in seven different directions; and you will become an object of horror to all the earth’s kingdoms. 26 And your carcasses will become food for every bird of the sky and animal of the ground, with no one to frighten them away.27 “Jehovah will strike you with the boils of Egypt, piles, eczema, and skin lesions, from which you cannot be healed. 28 Jehovah will strike you with madness and blindness and confusion. 29 You will grope about at midday, just as a blind man gropes about in darkness, and you will not succeed in anything you do; and you will be constantly defrauded and robbed, with no one to save you. 30 You will become engaged to a woman, but another man will rape her. You will build a house, but you will not live in it. You will plant a vineyard, but you will not begin to use it. 31 Your bull will be slaughtered before your eyes, but you will not eat any of it. Your donkey will be stolen right in front of you, but it will not return to you. Your sheep will be given to your enemies, but you will have no savior. 32 Your sons and your daughters will be given to another people while you look on, and you will always long for them, but your hands will be powerless. 33 The fruitage of your ground and all that you produce will be eaten by a people whom you have not known, and you will always be defrauded and crushed. 34 You will be driven mad by what your eyes see.35 “Jehovah will strike you with painful and incurable boils on your knees and legs, from the sole of your foot to the crown of your head. 36 Jehovah will drive you and the king whom you set up over yourself to a nation that you and your forefathers have not known, and there you will serve other gods, gods of wood and of stone. 37 And you will become an object of horror and of scorn, and a cause for ridicule among all the peoples to whom Jehovah drives you.38 “You will take much seed out into the field, but you will gather little, because the locust will devour it. 39 Vineyards you will plant and cultivate, but you will drink no wine and gather nothing, because the worm will consume it. 40 You will have olive trees in all your territory, but you will rub no oil on yourself, because your olives will drop off. 41 Sons and daughters you will bear, but they will not remain yours, because they will go off into captivity. 42 Swarms of insects will overwhelm all your trees and the fruitage of your ground. 43 The foreign resident who is in your midst will keep ascending higher and higher over you, while you yourself will keep descending lower and lower. 44 He will lend to you, but you will not lend to him. He will become the head, while you yourself will become the tail.45 “All these curses will certainly come upon you and pursue you and overtake you until you have been annihilated, because you did not listen to the voice of Jehovah your God by keeping his commandments and his statutes that he commanded you. 46 And they will continue on you and your offspring as a permanent sign and portent, 47 because you did not serve Jehovah your God with rejoicing and joy of heart when you had such an abundance of everything. 48 Jehovah will send your enemies against you, and you will serve them while you are hungry and thirsty and poorly clothed and lacking everything. He will put an iron yoke on your neck until he has annihilated you.49 “Jehovah will raise up against you a distant nation, from the end of the earth; it will pounce like an eagle, a nation whose language you will not understand, 50 a nation fierce in appearance that will show no regard to the old or favor to the young. 51 They will eat the offspring of your livestock and the fruitage of your ground until you have been annihilated. They will not leave any grain, new wine or oil, young cattle or sheep for you until they have destroyed you. 52 They will besiege you, shutting you up inside all your cities throughout your land until your high and fortified walls that you are trusting in fall down. Yes, they will certainly besiege you within all your cities throughout your land that Jehovah your God has given you. 53 Then you will have to eat your own children, the flesh of your sons and your daughters whom Jehovah your God has given you, because of the severity of the siege and the distress your enemy inflicts on you.54 “Even the most delicate and sensitive man among you will have no pity on his brother or his cherished wife or his sons who remain, 55 and he will not share with them any of the flesh of his sons that he will eat, because he has nothing else on account of the severity of the siege and the distress your enemy inflicts on your cities. 56 And the delicate and sensitive woman among you who would not even think of putting the sole of her foot on the ground because she is so delicate will show no pity to her cherished husband or her son or her daughter, 57 even toward the afterbirth that comes from between her legs and toward the sons she bears, for she will secretly eat them because of the severity of the siege and the distress your enemy inflicts on your cities.58 “If you will not carefully observe all the words of this Law that are written in this book and you do not fear this glorious and awe-inspiring name, that of Jehovah your God, 59 Jehovah will inflict very severe plagues on you and your offspring, great and enduring plagues, and grievous and enduring sicknesses. 60 He will bring back upon you all the diseases of Egypt that you used to fear, and they will certainly cling to you. 61 Moreover, Jehovah will even bring upon you every sickness or plague not written in the book of this Law until you have been annihilated. 62 Although you have become as numerous as the stars of the heavens, very few of your number will be left, because you did not listen to the voice of Jehovah your God.63 “And just as Jehovah once delighted to make you prosper and to multiply you, so Jehovah will delight to destroy you and to annihilate you; and you will be torn from the land you are about to possess.64 “Jehovah will scatter you among all the nations, from the one end of the earth to the other end of the earth, and there you will have to serve gods of wood and of stone, which you and your forefathers have not known. 65 You will have no peace among those nations nor a place of rest for the sole of your foot. Rather, Jehovah will give you there an anxious heart and failing eyes and a feeling of despair. 66 Your life will be in great peril, and you will feel dread night and day; and you will be uncertain of your survival. 67 In the morning you will say, ‘If only it were evening!’ and in the evening you will say, ‘If only it were morning!’ because of the dread you will feel in your heart and because of what your eyes will see. 68 And Jehovah will certainly bring you back to Egypt by ship, by the way that I told you, ‘You will never see it again,’ and there you will have to sell yourselves to your enemies as male and female slaves, but there will be no buyer.”
29 These are the words of the covenant that Jehovah commanded Moses to make with the people of Israel in the land of Moʹab, in addition to the covenant that he made with them at Hoʹreb.2 Moses then called together all Israel and said to them: “You have seen all that Jehovah did before your eyes in the land of Egypt to Pharʹaoh and all his servants and all his land, 3 the great judgments that your eyes saw, those great signs and miracles. 4 But Jehovah has not given you a heart to understand and eyes to see and ears to hear, down to this day. 5 ‘While I kept guiding you for 40 years in the wilderness, your garments did not wear out on you and your sandals did not wear out on your feet. 6 You did not eat bread, and you did not drink wine or anything alcoholic, so that you would know that I am Jehovah your God.’ 7 You eventually came to this place, and Siʹhon the king of Heshʹbon and Og the king of Baʹshan came out to meet us in battle, but we defeated them. 8 After that we took their land and gave it as an inheritance to the Reuʹben·ites, the Gadʹites, and the half tribe of the Ma·nasʹsites. 9 Therefore, observe the words of this covenant and obey them, so that everything you do will turn out well.10 “All of you are stationed today before Jehovah your God, the heads of your tribes, your elders, your officers, every man of Israel, 11 your children, your wives, and your foreign resident who is in the midst of your camp, from the one gathering your wood to the one drawing your water. 12 You are here in order to enter into the covenant of Jehovah your God and his oath, which Jehovah your God is making with you today 13 in order that he may establish you today as his people and that he may be your God, just as he has promised you and just as he swore to your forefathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.14 “Now it is not with you alone that I am making this covenant and this oath, 15 but it is with those standing here with us today before Jehovah our God and with those who are not here with us today. 16 (For you well know how we lived in the land of Egypt and how we passed through the midst of various nations on our journey. 17 And you used to see their detestable things and their disgusting idols of wood and stone, silver and gold, that were among them.) 18 Beware that there may not be a man or a woman, a family or a tribe among you today whose heart turns away from Jehovah our God to go serve the gods of those nations, that there may not be a root among you producing poisonous fruit and wormwood.19 “But if someone hears the words of this oath and boasts in his heart, saying, ‘I will have peace, though I insist on walking in the ways of my own heart,’ to the ruin of everything in his path, 20 Jehovah will not be willing to forgive him. Instead, Jehovah’s great anger will blaze against that man, and the entire curse written in this book will certainly come upon him, and Jehovah will indeed wipe out his name from under the heavens. 21 Jehovah will then single him out from all the tribes of Israel for calamity in accord with the entire curse of the covenant that is written in this book of the Law.22 “When the future generation of your sons and the foreigner from a distant land see the plagues of the land, the maladies that Jehovah has brought upon it— 23 sulfur and salt and burning, so that its whole land will not be sown or sprout, nor will any vegetation spring up in it, like the overthrow of Sodʹom and Go·morʹrah, Adʹmah and Ze·boiʹim, which Jehovah overthrew in his anger and in his wrath— 24 they and all the nations will say, ‘Why did Jehovah do this to this land? What caused this great, burning anger?’ 25 Then they will say, ‘It was because they abandoned the covenant of Jehovah, the God of their forefathers, which he made with them when he brought them out of the land of Egypt. 26 But they went and served other gods and bowed down to them, gods that they had not known and that he had not permitted them to worship. 27 Then Jehovah’s burning anger came against that land by bringing upon it the entire curse written in this book. 28 Therefore, Jehovah uprooted them from their soil in his anger and fury and great indignation and deported them to another land, where they are today.’29 “The things concealed belong to Jehovah our God, but the things revealed belong to us and to our descendants forever, so that we may carry out all the words of this Law.
3 “Then we turned and went up by way of Baʹshan. And Og, the king of Baʹshan, came out with all his people to meet us in battle at Edʹre·i. 2 So Jehovah said to me, ‘Do not be afraid of him, for I will give him and all his people and his land into your hand, and you will do to him just as you did to Siʹhon the king of the Amʹor·ites, who lived in Heshʹbon.’ 3 So Jehovah our God also gave King Og of Baʹshan and all his people into our hand, and we kept striking him down until none of his people survived. 4 We then captured all his cities. There was no town that we did not take from them—60 cities, all the region of Arʹgob, the kingdom of Og in Baʹshan. 5 All these cities were fortified with high walls, gates, and bars, along with a great number of rural towns. 6 However, we devoted them to destruction, just as we had done to King Siʹhon of Heshʹbon, in devoting every city to destruction, including men, women, and children. 7 And we took all the livestock and the spoil of the cities for ourselves.8 “At that time we seized the land of the two Amʹor·ite kings who were in the region of the Jordan, from the Arʹnon Valley as far as Mount Herʹmon 9 (the mountain that the Si·doʹni·ans used to call Sirʹi·on and the Amʹor·ites used to call Seʹnir), 10 all the cities of the tableland, all Gilʹe·ad, and all Baʹshan as far as Salʹe·cah and Edʹre·i, the cities of the kingdom that belonged to Og in Baʹshan. 11 For King Og of Baʹshan was the last remaining one of the Rephʹa·im. His bier was made of iron, and it is still in Rabʹbah of the Amʹmon·ites. It is nine cubits long and four cubits wide, by the standard cubit. 12 At that time we took possession of this land: from A·roʹer, which is by the Arʹnon Valley, and half of the mountainous region of Gilʹe·ad, and I have given its cities to the Reuʹben·ites and the Gadʹites. 13 And the rest of Gilʹe·ad and all Baʹshan of the kingdom of Og I have given to the half tribe of Ma·nasʹseh. All the region of Arʹgob, which belongs to Baʹshan, was known as the land of the Rephʹa·im.14 “Jaʹir the son of Ma·nasʹseh took all the region of Arʹgob as far as the boundary of the Geshʹur·ites and the Ma·acʹa·thites and named those villages of Bashan after himself, Havʹvoth-jaʹir, to this day. 15 And I have given Gilʹe·ad to Maʹchir. 16 And to the Reuʹben·ites and the Gadʹites, I have given from Gilʹe·ad to the Arʹnon Valley, with the middle of the valley as a boundary, and as far as Jabʹbok, the valley that is the boundary of the Amʹmon·ites, 17 and the Arʹa·bah and the Jordan and the border, from Chinʹne·reth to the Sea of the Arʹa·bah, the Salt Sea, at the base of the slopes of Pisʹgah toward the east.18 “I then gave you this command: ‘Jehovah your God has given you this land to take possession of it. All your valiant men will take up arms and cross over before your brothers, the Israelites. 19 Only your wives, your children, and your livestock (I well know that you have a great deal of livestock) will continue dwelling in the cities that I have given you, 20 until Jehovah gives your brothers rest, as he does for you, and they also have taken possession of the land that Jehovah your God will give them across the Jordan. Then you will come back, each one to his possession that I have given you.’21 “At that time I gave this command to Joshua: ‘You have seen with your own eyes what Jehovah your God has done to these two kings. Jehovah will do the same thing to all the kingdoms into which you will cross over. 22 You must not be afraid of them, for Jehovah your God is the one fighting for you.’23 “At that time I pleaded with Jehovah, saying, 24 ‘O Sovereign Lord Jehovah, you have begun to show your servant your greatness and your mighty arm, for what god in the heavens or on the earth performs such mighty deeds as you? 25 Please let me pass over and see the good land that is across the Jordan, this good mountainous region and Lebʹa·non.’ 26 But Jehovah was still furious with me because of you, and he would not listen to me. Rather, Jehovah said to me, ‘Enough from you! Never speak to me again about this matter. 27 Go up to the top of Pisʹgah, and look to the west and north and south and east and view the land with your eyes, for you will not cross over this Jordan. 28 Commission Joshua and encourage him and strengthen him, because he is the one who will cross over before this people and he is the one who will cause them to inherit the land that you will see.’ 29 All this happened while we were dwelling in the valley in front of Beth-peʹor.
30 “When all these words come upon you, the blessing and the curse that I have put before you, and you call them to mind in all the nations where Jehovah your God has dispersed you, 2 and you return to Jehovah your God and listen to his voice according to all that I am commanding you today, you and your sons, with all your heart and all your soul, 3 Jehovah your God will then bring back your captives and show you mercy and regather you from all the peoples where Jehovah your God has scattered you. 4 Even if your people are dispersed to the extremity of the heavens, from there Jehovah your God will gather you and bring you back. 5 Jehovah your God will bring you into the land your fathers took possession of, and you will possess it; and he will make you prosper and will multiply you more than your fathers. 6 Jehovah your God will cleanse your heart and the heart of your offspring, so that you will love Jehovah your God with all your heart and all your soul and you may live. 7 Then Jehovah your God will bring all these curses upon your enemies, who hated and persecuted you.8 “You will then return and listen to the voice of Jehovah and observe all his commandments that I am commanding you today. 9 Jehovah your God will make you abundantly prosperous in all the work of your hands, multiplying your children and your livestock and the produce of your ground, for Jehovah will again delight to make you prosper, just as he delighted in your forefathers. 10 For then you will listen to the voice of Jehovah your God and keep his commandments and statutes written in this book of the Law, and you will return to Jehovah your God with all your heart and all your soul.11 “Now this commandment that I am commanding you today is not too difficult for you, nor is it beyond your reach. 12 It is not in the heavens, so that you have to say, ‘Who will ascend to the heavens and get it for us, so that we may hear it and observe it?’ 13 Nor is it on the other side of the sea, so that you have to say, ‘Who will cross over to the other side of the sea and get it for us, so that we may hear it and observe it?’ 14 For the word is very near you, in your own mouth and in your own heart, so that you may do it.15 “See, I do put before you today life and good, and death and bad. 16 If you listen to the commandments of Jehovah your God that I am commanding you today, by loving Jehovah your God, by walking in his ways, and by keeping his commandments and his statutes and his judicial decisions, then you will live and multiply, and Jehovah your God will bless you in the land you are going to possess.17 “But if your heart turns away and you do not listen and you are enticed and bow down to other gods and serve them, 18 I tell you today that you will certainly perish. You will not live long in the land you are crossing the Jordan to possess. 19 I take the heavens and the earth as witnesses against you today that I have put life and death before you, the blessing and the curse; and you must choose life so that you may live, you and your descendants, 20 by loving Jehovah your God, by listening to his voice, and by sticking to him, for he is your life and by him you will endure a long time in the land that Jehovah swore to give to your forefathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.”
31 Then Moses went out and spoke these words to all Israel, 2 saying to them: “I am 120 years old today. I can no longer lead you, for Jehovah has said to me, ‘You will not cross this Jordan.’ 3 Jehovah your God is the one crossing before you, and he himself will annihilate these nations before you, and you will drive them away. Joshua is the one who will lead you across, just as Jehovah has spoken. 4 Jehovah will do to them just as he did to Siʹhon and to Og, the kings of the Amʹor·ites, and to their land when he annihilated them. 5 Jehovah will defeat them for you, and you are to do to them according to the whole commandment that I have given you. 6 Be courageous and strong. Do not be afraid or struck with terror before them, for Jehovah your God is the one marching with you. He will neither desert you nor abandon you.”7 Moses then called Joshua and said to him before the eyes of all Israel: “Be courageous and strong, for you are the one who will bring this people into the land that Jehovah swore to their forefathers to give to them, and you will give it to them as an inheritance. 8 Jehovah is the one marching before you, and he will continue with you. He will neither desert you nor abandon you. Do not be afraid or be terrified.”9 Then Moses wrote this Law and gave it to the priests, the Levites, who carry the ark of Jehovah’s covenant, and to all the elders of Israel. 10 Moses commanded them, saying: “At the end of every seven years, at the appointed time in the year of the release, during the Festival of Booths, 11 when all Israel appears before the presence of Jehovah your God in the place that he chooses, you should read this Law for all Israel to hear it. 12 Gather the people together, the men, the women, the children, and your foreign resident who is within your cities, in order that they may listen and learn about and fear Jehovah your God and take care to carry out all the words of this Law. 13 Then their sons who have not known this Law will listen and learn to fear Jehovah your God all the days that you live in the land that you are crossing the Jordan to possess.”14 Jehovah then said to Moses: “Look! The time has drawn near for you to die. Call Joshua, and present yourselves at the tent of meeting, so that I may commission him.” So Moses and Joshua went and presented themselves at the tent of meeting. 15 Then Jehovah appeared at the tent in the pillar of cloud, and the pillar of cloud stood by the entrance of the tent.16 Jehovah now said to Moses: “Look! You are about to die, and this people will begin to commit spiritual prostitution with the foreign gods that are around them in the land to which they are going. They will forsake me and break my covenant that I have made with them. 17 At that time my anger will blaze against them, and I will forsake them and hide my face from them until they are devoured. Then after many calamities and distresses have come upon them, they will say, ‘Is it not because our God is not in our midst that these calamities have come upon us?’ 18 But I will keep my face hidden in that day because of all the wickedness that they have done in turning to other gods.19 “Now write down this song for yourselves and teach it to the Israelites. Have them learn it in order that this song may serve as my witness against the people of Israel. 20 When I bring them to the land that I have sworn about to their forefathers—one flowing with milk and honey—and they eat their fill and prosper, they will turn to other gods and serve them and treat me with disrespect and break my covenant. 21 When many calamities and distresses come upon them, this song will serve as a witness to them (for their descendants should not forget it), for I already know the inclination that they have developed even before I bring them into the land about which I have sworn.”22 So Moses wrote down this song in that day and taught it to the Israelites.23 He then commissioned Joshua the son of Nun and said: “Be courageous and strong, for you are the one who will bring the Israelites into the land about which I have sworn to them, and I will continue with you.”24 As soon as Moses had completed writing the words of this Law in a book in their entirety, 25 Moses commanded the Levites who carry the ark of Jehovah’s covenant, saying: 26 “Take this book of the Law and place it at the side of the ark of the covenant of Jehovah your God, and it will serve as a witness there against you. 27 For I myself well know your rebelliousness and your stubbornness. If you have been so rebellious against Jehovah while I am still alive with you, then how much more so will you be after my death! 28 Gather together to me all the elders of your tribes and your officers, and let me speak these words in their hearing, and let me take the heavens and the earth as witnesses against them. 29 For I well know that after my death you will surely act wickedly and turn aside from the way about which I have commanded you. And calamity will certainly befall you at the close of the days, because you will do what is bad in the eyes of Jehovah and you will offend him by the works of your hands.”30 Then in the hearing of the entire congregation of Israel, Moses recited the words of this song from beginning to end:
32 “Give ear, O heavens, and I will speak,And let the earth hear the words of my mouth. 2 My instruction will fall as the rain;My words will trickle as the dew,As gentle rains upon grassAnd as copious showers upon vegetation. 3 For I will declare the name of Jehovah.Tell about the greatness of our God! 4 The Rock, perfect is his activity,For all his ways are justice.A God of faithfulness who is never unjust;Righteous and upright is he. 5 They are the ones who have acted corruptly.They are not his children, the defect is their own.They are a crooked and twisted generation! 6 Is this the way that you should treat Jehovah,O foolish and unwise people?Is he not your Father who caused your existence,The One who made you and firmly established you? 7 Remember the days of old;Consider the years of past generations.Ask your father, and he can tell you;Your elders, and they will inform you. 8 When the Most High gave the nations their inheritance,When he divided the sons of Adam from one another,He fixed the boundary of the peoplesWith regard for the number of the sons of Israel. 9 For Jehovah’s people are his portion;Jacob is his inheritance.10 He found him in a wilderness landAnd in an empty, howling desert.He protectively encircled him, took care of him,And safeguarded him as the pupil of his eye.11 Just as an eagle stirs up its nest,Hovers over its fledglings,Spreading out its wings, taking them,Carrying them on its pinions,12 Jehovah alone kept leading him;No foreign god was with him.13 He made him ride upon earth’s high places,So that he ate the produce of the field.He nourished him with honey from the cragAnd oil out of a flinty rock,14 Butter of the herd and milk of the flock,Together with the choicest sheep,And rams of Baʹshan, and he-goats,Together with the finest wheat;And you drank wine from the blood of grapes.15 When Jeshʹu·run grew fat, he kicked out rebelliously.You have grown fat, you have become stout, you have become bloated.So he forsook God, who made him,And despised the Rock of his salvation.16 They incited him to fury with foreign gods;They were offending him with detestable things.17 They were sacrificing to demons, not to God,To gods that they had not known,New ones that came along recently,To gods that your forefathers did not know.18 You forgot the Rock who fathered you,And you did not remember the God who gave birth to you.19 When Jehovah saw it, he rejected themBecause his sons and his daughters offended him.20 So he said, ‘I will hide my face from them;I will see what will become of them.For they are a perverse generation,Sons in whom there is no faithfulness.21 They have incited me to fury with what is not a god;They have offended me with their worthless idols.So I will incite them to jealousy with what is not a people;I will offend them with a foolish nation.22 For my anger has kindled a fireThat will burn to the depths of the Grave,And it will consume the earth and its produceAnd will set ablaze the foundations of mountains.23 I will increase their calamities;I will use up my arrows on them.24 They will be exhausted from hungerAnd eaten up by burning fever and bitter destruction.I will send the teeth of beasts against themAnd the venom of reptiles of the dust.25 Outside, a sword will bereave them;Inside, there is terrorFor both young man and virgin,Infant together with gray-haired man.26 I would have said: “I will scatter them;I will make the memory of them cease from among men,”27 If not for my dread of the enemy’s reaction,Because the adversaries might misconstrue it.They might say: “Our power has triumphed;It was not Jehovah who did all of this.”28 For they are a nation devoid of sense,And there is no understanding among them.29 If only they were wise! They would ponder over this.They would think about their outcome.30 How could one chase after 1,000,And two put 10,000 to flight?Not unless their Rock had sold themAnd Jehovah had surrendered them.31 For their rock is not like our Rock,Even our enemies have understood this.32 For their vine is from the vine of SodʹomAnd from the terraces of Go·morʹrah.Their grapes are grapes of poison,Their clusters are bitter.33 Their wine is the venom of serpents,The cruel poison of cobras.34 Is this not stored up with me,Sealed up in my storehouse?35 Vengeance is mine, and retribution,At the appointed time when their foot slips,For the day of their disaster is near,And what awaits them will come quickly.’36 For Jehovah will judge his people,And he will feel pity for his servantsWhen he sees that their strength has waned,And that only the helpless and weak remain.37 Then he will say, ‘Where are their gods,The rock in whom they sought refuge,38 Who used to eat the fat of their sacrifices,To drink the wine of their drink offerings?Let them rise up and help you.Let them become your place of refuge.39 See now that I—I am he,And there are no gods apart from me.I put to death, and I make alive.I wound, and I will heal,And no one can rescue from my hand.40 For I raise my hand to heaven,And I swear: “As surely as I live forever,”41 If I sharpen my flashing swordAnd prepare my hand for judgment,I will pay back vengeance on my adversariesAnd bring retribution to those who hate me.42 I will make my arrows drunk with blood,And my sword will eat flesh,With the blood of the slain and the captives,With the heads of the leaders of the enemy.’43 Be glad, you nations, with his people,For he will avenge the blood of his servants,And he will repay vengeance to his adversariesAnd will make atonement for the land of his people.”44 Thus Moses came and recited all the words of this song in the hearing of the people, he and Ho·sheʹa the son of Nun. 45 After Moses finished speaking all these words to all Israel, 46 he said to them: “Take to heart all the words of my warning to you today, so that you may command your sons to take care to do all the words of this Law. 47 For this is no empty word for you, but it means your life, and by this word you may live long in the land that you are crossing the Jordan to possess.”48 Jehovah spoke to Moses on this same day, saying: 49 “Go up into this mountain of Abʹa·rim, Mount Neʹbo, which is in the land of Moʹab, which faces toward Jerʹi·cho, and view the land of Caʹnaan, which I am giving to the Israelites as a possession. 50 Then you will die on the mountain you are about to ascend, and be gathered to your people, just as Aaron your brother died on Mount Hor and was gathered to his people, 51 because both of you were unfaithful to me among the Israelites at the waters of Merʹi·bah of Kaʹdesh in the wilderness of Zin, because you did not sanctify me before the people of Israel. 52 You will see the land from a distance, but you will not enter the land that I am giving to the people of Israel.”
33 Now this is the blessing that Moses the man of the true God pronounced on the Israelites before his death. 2 He said:“Jehovah—from Siʹnai he came,And he shone upon them from Seʹir.He shone forth in glory from the mountainous region of Paʹran,And with him were holy myriads,At his right hand his warriors. 3 He had affection for his people;All their holy ones are in your hand.They were sitting at your feet;They began to listen to your words. 4 (Moses gave us a command, a law,As a possession of the congregation of Jacob.) 5 And He became king in Jeshʹu·run,When the heads of the people gathered together,Along with all the tribes of Israel. 6 Let Reuʹben live and not die off,And may his men not become few.” 7 And he pronounced this blessing on Judah:“Hear, O Jehovah, the voice of Judah,And may you bring him back to his people.His arms have defended what belongs to him,And may you help him against his adversaries.” 8 Of Leʹvi he said:“Your Thumʹmim and your Uʹrim belong to the man loyal to you,Whom you put to the test at Masʹsah.You began to contend with him by the waters of Merʹi·bah, 9 The man who said to his father and his mother, ‘I have not shown regard to them.’Even his brothers he did not acknowledge,And he ignored his own sons.For they kept your word,And they observed your covenant.10 Let them instruct Jacob in your judicial decisionsAnd Israel in your Law.Let them offer up incense as a pleasant aroma for youAnd a whole offering on your altar.11 Bless, O Jehovah, his strength,And may you show pleasure in the work of his hands.Crush the legs of those who rise up against him,So that those who hate him may rise up no more.”12 Of Benjamin he said:“Let the beloved one of Jehovah reside in security by him;While he shelters him the whole day,He will reside between his shoulders.”13 Of Joseph he said:“May his land be blessed by JehovahWith the choice things of heaven,With dew and the waters from the springs below,14 With choice things produced by the sunAnd the choice yield each month,15 With the choicest things from the ancient mountainsAnd choice things of the enduring hills,16 With the choice things of the earth and what fills it,And with the approval of the One residing in the thornbush.May they come upon the head of Joseph,On the crown of the head of the one singled out from his brothers.17 His splendor is like that of a firstborn bull,And his horns are the horns of a wild bull.With them he will push peoplesAll together to the ends of the earth.They are the tens of thousands of Eʹphra·im,And they are the thousands of Ma·nasʹseh.”18 Of Zebʹu·lun he said:“Rejoice, O Zebʹu·lun, in your going out,And you, Isʹsa·char, in your tents.19 They will call peoples to the mountain.There they will offer the sacrifices of righteousness.For they will draw from the abundant wealth of the seasAnd the hidden hoards of the sand.”20 Of Gad he said:“Blessed is the one widening the borders of Gad.He lies there like a lion,Ready to tear off the arm, yes, the crown of the head.21 He will select the first portion for himself,For there the allotment of a lawgiver is reserved.The heads of the people will gather together.The righteousness of Jehovah he will execute,And his judicial decisions with Israel.”22 Of Dan he said:“Dan is a lion cub.He will leap out from Baʹshan.”23 Of Naphʹta·li he said:“Naphʹta·li is satisfied with the approvalAnd full of the blessing of Jehovah.Take possession of the west and south.”24 Of Ashʹer he said:“Blessed with sons is Ashʹer.May he be favored by his brothers,And may he dip his feet in oil.25 Iron and copper are your gate locks,And you will be secure all your days.26 There is none like the true God of Jeshʹu·run,Who rides through heaven to help youAnd who rides upon the clouds in his majesty.27 God is a refuge from ancient times,His everlasting arms are beneath you.And he will drive away the enemy from before you,And he will say, ‘Annihilate them!’28 Israel will reside in security,And the fountain of Jacob will be secludedIn a land of grain and new wine,Whose skies will drip with dew.29 Happy you are, O Israel!Who is there like you,A people enjoying salvation in Jehovah,Your protective shieldAnd your majestic sword?Your enemies will cringe before you,And you will tread on their backs.”
34 Then Moses went up from the desert plains of Moʹab to Mount Neʹbo, to the top of Pisʹgah, which faces Jerʹi·cho. And Jehovah showed him all the land, from Gilʹe·ad to Dan, 2 and all Naphʹta·li and the land of Eʹphra·im and Ma·nasʹseh, and all the land of Judah as far as the western sea, 3 and the Negʹeb and the District, the valley plain of Jerʹi·cho, the city of the palm trees, as far as Zoʹar.4 Jehovah then said to him: “This is the land about which I have sworn to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, saying, ‘To your offspring I will give it.’ I have let you see it with your own eyes, but you will not cross over there.”5 After that Moses the servant of Jehovah died there in the land of Moʹab just as Jehovah had said. 6 He buried him in the valley in the land of Moʹab, opposite Beth-peʹor, and nobody knows where his grave is down to this day. 7 Moses was 120 years old at his death. His eyes had not grown dim, and his strength had not departed. 8 The people of Israel wept for Moses on the desert plains of Moʹab for 30 days. Then the days of weeping and mourning for Moses were completed.9 Joshua the son of Nun was full of the spirit of wisdom, for Moses had laid his hand on him; and the Israelites began to listen to him, and they did just as Jehovah had commanded Moses. 10 But there has never again arisen a prophet in Israel like Moses, whom Jehovah knew face-to-face. 11 He performed all the signs and the miracles that Jehovah had sent him to do in the land of Egypt to Pharʹaoh and all his servants and all his land, 12 along with the mighty hand and the awesome power that Moses displayed before the eyes of all Israel.
4 “Now, O Israel, listen to the regulations and the judicial decisions that I am teaching you to observe, so that you may live and go in and take possession of the land that Jehovah, the God of your forefathers, is giving you. 2 You must not add to the word that I am commanding you, neither must you take away from it, so as to keep the commandments of Jehovah your God that I am commanding you.3 “Your own eyes have seen what Jehovah did in the case of the Baʹal of Peʹor; Jehovah your God annihilated from your midst every man who walked after the Baʹal of Peʹor. 4 But you who are holding fast to Jehovah your God are all alive today. 5 See, I have taught you regulations and judicial decisions, just as Jehovah my God has commanded me, so that you may observe them in the land you will take possession of. 6 You must carefully follow them, because this will show wisdom and understanding on your part before the peoples who will hear about all these regulations, and they will say, ‘This great nation is undoubtedly a wise and understanding people.’ 7 For what great nation has gods as near to it as Jehovah our God is to us whenever we call on him? 8 And what great nation has righteous regulations and judicial decisions like this entire Law that I am putting before you today?9 “Just be careful and watch yourself closely, so that you may not forget the things that your eyes have seen and so that they may not depart from your heart all the days of your life. You must also make them known to your sons and to your grandsons. 10 On the day that you stood before Jehovah your God in Hoʹreb, Jehovah said to me, ‘Congregate the people together to me so that I may let them hear my words, in order that they may learn to fear me all the days that they are alive on the ground and that they may teach their sons.’11 “So you came near and stood at the base of the mountain, and the mountain was burning with fire up to the very heavens; there was darkness, cloud, and thick gloom. 12 And Jehovah began to speak to you out of the fire. You heard the sound of words, but you saw no form—there was only a voice. 13 And he declared his covenant to you, which he commanded you to observe—the Ten Commandments. Afterward, he wrote them on two tablets of stone. 14 At that time Jehovah commanded me to teach you regulations and judicial decisions, which you are to observe in the land you will enter to take possession of.15 “Therefore, watch yourselves closely—since you did not see any form on the day Jehovah spoke to you in Hoʹreb out of the middle of the fire— 16 that you may not act corruptly by making for yourselves any carved image having the form of any symbol, the representation of male or female, 17 the representation of any animal on the earth or the representation of any bird that flies in the sky, 18 the representation of anything creeping on the ground or the representation of any fish in the waters under the earth. 19 And when you raise your eyes to the heavens and see the sun and the moon and the stars—all the army of the heavens—do not get seduced and bow down to them and serve them. Jehovah your God has given them to all the peoples under the whole heavens. 20 But you are the ones Jehovah took and brought out of the iron-smelting furnace, out of Egypt, to become the people of his personal possession, as you are today.21 “Jehovah became angry with me because of you, and he swore that I should not cross the Jordan or go into the good land that Jehovah your God is giving you as an inheritance. 22 For I am to die in this land; I will not cross the Jordan, but you will cross over and take possession of this good land. 23 Be careful that you do not forget the covenant of Jehovah your God that he made with you, and do not make for yourselves a carved image, the form of anything forbidden to you by Jehovah your God. 24 For Jehovah your God is a consuming fire, a God who requires exclusive devotion.25 “If you become father to sons and grandsons and you have lived a long time in the land and you act ruinously and make a carved image of any kind and you do what is evil in the eyes of Jehovah your God so as to offend him, 26 I do take the heavens and the earth as witnesses against you today that you will surely and quickly perish from the land that you are crossing the Jordan to take possession of. You will not last long on it, but you will be utterly annihilated. 27 Jehovah will scatter you among the peoples, and just a few of you will survive among the nations to which Jehovah will have driven you. 28 There you will have to serve gods of wood and stone made by human hands, gods that cannot see or hear or eat or smell.29 “If you search for Jehovah your God from there, you will certainly find him, if you inquire for him with all your heart and with all your soul. 30 When you are in great distress and all these things have happened to you in later times, then you will return to Jehovah your God and listen to his voice. 31 For Jehovah your God is a merciful God. He will not desert you or bring you to ruin or forget the covenant that he swore to your forefathers.32 “Ask, now, about the former days before your time, from the day when God created man on the earth; search from one end of the heavens to the other end of the heavens. Has anything so great ever happened or has anything like it ever been heard of? 33 Have any other people heard the voice of God speaking out of the fire the way you have heard it and kept on living? 34 Or has God ever attempted to take for himself a nation out of the midst of another nation along with judgments, with signs, with miracles, with war, with a mighty hand, with an outstretched arm, and with terrifying deeds, as Jehovah your God did for you in Egypt before your very eyes? 35 You yourselves have been shown these things so you will know that Jehovah is the true God; there is no other besides him. 36 He made you hear his voice from the heavens to correct you, and on the earth he made you see his great fire, and his words you heard from out of the fire.37 “Because he loved your forefathers and has chosen their offspring after them, you were brought out of Egypt in his presence by his great power. 38 From before you he drove away nations greater and mightier than you, to bring you in and give you their land as an inheritance, as it is today. 39 Know, therefore, on this day, and take it to heart that Jehovah is the true God in the heavens above and on the earth beneath. There is no other. 40 You must keep his regulations and his commandments that I am commanding you today, in order that it may go well with you and your sons after you, so that you may long remain in the land that Jehovah your God is giving you.”41 At that time Moses set apart three cities on the eastern side of the Jordan. 42 If any manslayer unintentionally kills his fellow man and he did not previously hate him, he must flee to one of these cities and live. 43 The cities are Beʹzer in the wilderness on the tableland for the Reuʹben·ites, Raʹmoth in Gilʹe·ad for the Gadʹites, and Goʹlan in Baʹshan for the Ma·nasʹsites.44 Now this is the Law that Moses set before the people of Israel. 45 These are the reminders, the regulations, and the judicial decisions that Moses gave to the Israelites after they came out of Egypt, 46 in the region of the Jordan, in the valley opposite Beth-peʹor, in the land of King Siʹhon of the Amʹor·ites, who was dwelling in Heshʹbon, whom Moses and the Israelites defeated after coming out of Egypt. 47 And they took possession of his land and of the land of King Og of Baʹshan, the two kings of the Amʹor·ites who were in the region east of the Jordan, 48 from A·roʹer, which is on the rim of the Arʹnon Valley, up to Mount Siʹon, that is, Herʹmon, 49 and all the Arʹa·bah in the region east of the Jordan, and as far as the Sea of the Arʹa·bah, at the base of the slopes of Pisʹgah.
5 Moses then summoned all Israel and said to them: “Hear, O Israel, the regulations and the judicial decisions that I am announcing to you today, and you must learn them and carefully observe them. 2 Jehovah our God made a covenant with us in Hoʹreb. 3 It was not with our forefathers that Jehovah made this covenant, but with us, all of us alive here today. 4 Jehovah spoke face-to-face with you in the mountain, out of the fire. 5 I was standing between Jehovah and you at that time to convey to you the word of Jehovah, for you were afraid because of the fire and did not go up the mountain. He said:6 “‘I am Jehovah your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of slavery. 7 You must never have any other gods besides me.8 “‘You must not make for yourself a carved image or a form like anything that is in the heavens above or on the earth below or in the waters under the earth. 9 You must not bow down to them nor be led to serve them, for I, Jehovah your God, am a God who requires exclusive devotion, bringing punishment for the error of fathers upon sons, upon the third generation and upon the fourth generation of those who hate me, 10 but showing loyal love to the thousandth generation of those who love me and keep my commandments.11 “‘You must not take up the name of Jehovah your God in a worthless way, for Jehovah will not leave anyone unpunished who takes up his name in a worthless way.12 “‘Observe the Sabbath day to keep it sacred, just as Jehovah your God commanded you. 13 You are to labor and do all your work in six days, 14 but the seventh day is a sabbath to Jehovah your God. You must not do any work, neither you nor your son nor your daughter nor your slave man nor your slave girl nor your bull nor your donkey nor any of your domestic animals nor your foreign resident who is inside your cities, in order that your slave man and your slave girl may rest the same as you. 15 Remember that you became a slave in the land of Egypt and that Jehovah your God brought you out of there with a mighty hand and an outstretched arm. That is why Jehovah your God commanded you to observe the Sabbath day.16 “‘Honor your father and your mother, just as Jehovah your God has commanded you, so that you may live a long time and you may prosper in the land that Jehovah your God is giving you.17 “‘You must not murder.18 “‘Neither must you commit adultery.19 “‘Neither must you steal.20 “‘Neither must you testify to a falsehood against your fellow man.21 “‘Neither must you desire your fellow man’s wife. Neither must you selfishly desire your fellow man’s house nor his field nor his slave man nor his slave girl nor his bull nor his donkey nor anything that belongs to your fellow man.’22 “These commandments Jehovah spoke to all your congregation on the mountain, out of the fire, the cloud, and the thick gloom, with a loud voice, and he added nothing further; then he wrote them on two tablets of stone and gave them to me.23 “But as soon as you had heard the voice out of the darkness, while the mountain was burning with fire, all the heads of your tribes and the elders approached me. 24 Then you said, ‘Here Jehovah our God has shown us his glory and his greatness, and we have heard his voice out of the fire. Today we have seen that God can speak with man and he can keep living. 25 Now, why should we die? For this great fire may consume us. If we continue hearing the voice of Jehovah our God, we are sure to die. 26 For who is there of all flesh who has heard the voice of the living God speaking out of the fire as we did and yet goes on living? 27 You yourself must go near to hear all that Jehovah our God will say, and you will be the one to tell us all that Jehovah our God says to you, and we will listen and do it.’28 “So Jehovah heard the words you spoke to me, and Jehovah said to me, ‘I have heard the words that this people have spoken to you. All they have said is good. 29 If only they would always have a heart inclined to fear me and to keep all my commandments; then it would go well with them and their sons forever! 30 Go say to them: “Return to your tents.” 31 But you should stay here with me, and let me tell you all the commandments, the regulations, and the judicial decisions that you should teach to them and that they are to observe in the land that I am giving them to take possession of.’ 32 Now you people should be careful to do just as Jehovah your God has commanded you. You must not turn to the right or to the left. 33 You should walk in all the way that Jehovah your God has commanded you, in order that you may live and prosper and prolong your days in the land that you will take possession of.
6 “Now these are the commandments, the regulations, and the judicial decisions that Jehovah your God has given to teach you, so that you may observe them when you cross over into the land that you are to take possession of, 2 in order that you may fear Jehovah your God and keep all his statutes and his commandments that I am commanding you—you and your son and your grandson—all the days of your life, so that you may live a long time. 3 And you must listen, O Israel, and carefully observe them, so that you may prosper and become very many in the land flowing with milk and honey, just as Jehovah, the God of your forefathers, has promised you.4 “Listen, O Israel: Jehovah our God is one Jehovah. 5 You must love Jehovah your God with all your heart and all your soul and all your strength. 6 These words that I am commanding you today must be on your heart, 7 and you must inculcate them in your sons and speak of them when you sit in your house and when you walk on the road and when you lie down and when you get up. 8 Tie them as a reminder on your hand, and they must be like a headband on your forehead. 9 Write them on the doorposts of your house and on your gates.10 “When Jehovah your God brings you into the land that he swore to your forefathers Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob to give you—great and fine cities that you did not build, 11 houses full of all sorts of good things that you did not work for, hewn cisterns that you did not dig, and vineyards and olive trees that you did not plant—and you have eaten and become satisfied, 12 be careful not to forget Jehovah, who brought you out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of slavery. 13 Jehovah your God you should fear, and him you should serve, and by his name you should swear. 14 You must not follow after other gods, any gods of the peoples who are all around you, 15 for Jehovah your God who is in your midst is a God who requires exclusive devotion. Otherwise, the anger of Jehovah your God will blaze against you and he will annihilate you from the face of the earth.16 “You must not put Jehovah your God to the test the way you put him to the test at Masʹsah. 17 You should diligently observe the commandments of Jehovah your God and his reminders and his regulations that he has commanded you to observe. 18 You must do what is right and good in Jehovah’s eyes, in order that you may prosper and that you may enter and take possession of the good land about which Jehovah has sworn to your forefathers, 19 by driving out all your enemies from before you, just as Jehovah has promised.20 “In the future, when your son asks you, ‘What is the meaning of the reminders, the regulations, and the judicial decisions that Jehovah our God has commanded you?’ 21 then you will say to your son, ‘We became slaves to Pharʹaoh in Egypt, but Jehovah brought us out of Egypt with a mighty hand. 22 So before our eyes Jehovah kept sending signs and miracles, great and devastating, upon Egypt, upon Pharʹaoh, and upon all his household. 23 And he brought us out from there in order to bring us here to give us the land about which he had sworn to our forefathers. 24 Then Jehovah commanded us to carry out all these regulations and to fear Jehovah our God for our lasting good, so that we could keep alive, as we are today. 25 And it will mean righteousness for us if we are careful to observe all these commandments in obedience to Jehovah our God, just as he has commanded us.’
7 “When Jehovah your God brings you into the land you are about to enter and take possession of, he will also clear away populous nations from before you: the Hitʹtites, the Girʹga·shites, the Amʹor·ites, the Caʹnaan·ites, the Perʹiz·zites, the Hiʹvites, and the Jebʹu·sites, seven nations more populous and mightier than you are. 2 Jehovah your God will give them over to you, and you will defeat them. You should without fail devote them to destruction. You must not make any covenant with them nor show them any favor. 3 You must not form any marriage alliances with them. Do not give your daughters to their sons or take their daughters for your sons. 4 For they will turn your sons away from following me to serve other gods; then Jehovah’s anger will blaze against you, and he will swiftly annihilate you.5 “Instead, this is what you should do to them: Tear down their altars, break up their sacred pillars, cut down their sacred poles, and burn up their graven images. 6 For you are a holy people to Jehovah your God, and Jehovah your God has chosen you to become his people, his special property, out of all the peoples who are on the face of the earth.7 “It was not because you were the most numerous of all the peoples that Jehovah showed affection for you and chose you, for you were the smallest of all the peoples. 8 Rather, it was because of Jehovah’s love for you and because he kept the oath that he had sworn to your forefathers that Jehovah brought you out with a mighty hand, to redeem you from the house of slavery, from the power of Pharʹaoh king of Egypt. 9 You well know that Jehovah your God is the true God, the faithful God, keeping his covenant and loyal love to a thousand generations of those who love him and keep his commandments. 10 But those who hate him he will repay to their face with destruction. He will not be slow to deal with those who hate him; he will repay them to their face. 11 Therefore, take care to keep the commandments and the regulations and the judicial decisions that I am commanding you today, by observing them.12 “If you continue listening to these judicial decisions and you observe them and carry them out, Jehovah your God will keep the covenant and the loyal love about which he swore to your forefathers. 13 He will love you and bless you and multiply you. Yes, he will bless you with many children and with the produce of your soil, your grain, your new wine, your oil, the calves of your herds and the lambs of your flocks, in the land that he swore to your forefathers to give to you. 14 You will become the most blessed of all the peoples; no man or woman among you will be childless, nor will your livestock be without young. 15 Jehovah will take away from you all sickness, and he will not bring upon you any of the terrible diseases that you have known in Egypt. Instead, he will bring them upon all those who hate you. 16 You are to destroy all the peoples whom Jehovah your God gives over to you. You must not feel sorry for them, and you must not serve their gods, because that would be a snare to you.17 “If you should say in your heart, ‘These nations outnumber us. How can I drive them away?’ 18 you must not be afraid of them. You should remind yourself of what Jehovah your God did to Pharʹaoh and all Egypt, 19 the great judgments that your eyes saw and the signs and the miracles and the mighty hand and the outstretched arm with which Jehovah your God brought you out. That is what Jehovah your God will do to all the peoples you fear. 20 Jehovah your God will send the feeling of dejection upon them until those who were left remaining and who were concealing themselves from before you perish. 21 Do not be struck with terror because of them, for Jehovah your God is with you, a great and awe-inspiring God.22 “Jehovah your God will certainly drive these nations away from before you little by little. You will not be allowed to put an end to them quickly, so that the wild animals of the field will not multiply against you. 23 Jehovah your God will give them over to you and utterly defeat them until they are annihilated. 24 He will give their kings into your hand, and you will wipe out their names from under the heavens. Nobody will stand up to you, until you have exterminated them. 25 You should burn the graven images of their gods in the fire. Do not desire the silver and the gold on them or take it for yourself, so that you are not ensnared by it, for it is something detestable to Jehovah your God. 26 You must not bring a detestable thing into your house and thereby become something devoted to destruction like it. You should utterly loathe it and absolutely detest it, because it is something devoted to destruction.
8 “You should be careful to observe every commandment that I am giving you today, so that you may continue living and multiply and go in and take possession of the land about which Jehovah swore to your forefathers. 2 Remember the long road that Jehovah your God made you walk these 40 years in the wilderness, to humble you and to put you to the test so as to know what was in your heart, whether you would keep his commandments or not. 3 So he humbled you and let you go hungry and fed you with the manna, which neither you had known nor your fathers had known, in order to make you know that man does not live by bread alone but man lives by every expression from Jehovah’s mouth. 4 The clothing you wore did not wear out, nor did your feet become swollen these 40 years. 5 You well know in your heart that just as a man corrects his son, Jehovah your God was correcting you.6 “Now you must keep the commandments of Jehovah your God by walking in his ways and by fearing him. 7 For Jehovah your God is bringing you into a good land, a land of streams of water, springs and fountains flowing in the valley plain and in the mountainous region, 8 a land of wheat and barley, of grapevines, fig trees, and pomegranates, a land of olive oil and honey, 9 a land where food will not be scarce and you will lack nothing, a land where the stones contain iron and from its mountains you will mine copper.10 “When you have eaten and are satisfied, you must praise Jehovah your God for the good land that he has given you. 11 Be careful not to forget Jehovah your God by failing to keep his commandments, his judicial decisions, and his statutes that I am commanding you today. 12 When you eat and are satisfied and you build fine houses and dwell in them, 13 when your herd and your flocks multiply and your silver and gold increase and you have an abundance of everything, 14 do not let your heart become proud and cause you to forget Jehovah your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of slavery, 15 who caused you to walk through the great and fearsome wilderness, with poisonous serpents and scorpions and with parched ground that has no water. He made water flow out of the flinty rock 16 and fed you with manna in the wilderness, which your fathers had not known, in order to humble you and to put you to the test so as to benefit you in the future. 17 If you should say in your heart, ‘My own power and the strength of my own hand have produced this wealth for me,’ 18 remember that it is Jehovah your God who gives power to you to make wealth, in order to carry out his covenant that he swore to your forefathers, as it is today.19 “If you should ever forget Jehovah your God and you walk after other gods and serve them and bow down to them, I do bear witness against you today that you will surely perish. 20 Like the nations that Jehovah is destroying before you, that is how you will perish, because you would not listen to the voice of Jehovah your God.
9 “Hear, O Israel, today you are crossing the Jordan to go in and dispossess nations greater and mightier than you, cities great and fortified to the heavens, 2 a people great and tall, the sons of the Anʹa·kim, about whom you know and have heard it said, ‘Who can stand up to the sons of Aʹnak?’ 3 Therefore, you should know this day that Jehovah your God will cross ahead of you. He is a consuming fire, and he will annihilate them. He will subdue them before your eyes so that you may quickly drive them out and destroy them, just as Jehovah has promised you.4 “Do not say in your heart when Jehovah your God drives them away from before you, ‘It was because of my own righteousness that Jehovah has brought me in to take possession of this land.’ Rather, it is because of the wickedness of these nations that Jehovah is driving them away from before you. 5 It is not because of your righteousness or the uprightness of your heart that you are going in to take possession of their land. Instead, it is because of the wickedness of these nations that Jehovah your God is driving them away from before you and in order to carry out the word that Jehovah swore to your forefathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. 6 Know, then, that it is not because of your righteousness that Jehovah your God is giving you this good land to take possession of, because you are an obstinate people.7 “Remember—never forget—the way you provoked Jehovah your God in the wilderness. From the day that you left the land of Egypt until your coming to this place, you have rebelled against Jehovah. 8 Even in Hoʹreb you provoked Jehovah, and Jehovah was so angry with you that he was ready to annihilate you. 9 When I went up the mountain to receive the stone tablets, the tablets of the covenant that Jehovah made with you, I remained on the mountain 40 days and 40 nights, eating no food and drinking no water. 10 Then Jehovah gave me the two tablets of stone written on with God’s finger, and on them were all the words that Jehovah had spoken to you on the mountain out of the fire in the day of the assembly. 11 At the end of the 40 days and 40 nights, Jehovah gave me the two tablets of stone, the tablets of the covenant, 12 and Jehovah told me, ‘Get up, go down quickly from here, because your people whom you brought out of Egypt have acted corruptly. They have quickly turned aside from the path I commanded them to follow. They have made a metal image for themselves.’ 13 Jehovah then said to me, ‘I have seen this people, and look! it is an obstinate people. 14 Let me be, and I will annihilate them and wipe out their name from under the heavens, and let me make you a nation mightier and more numerous than they are.’15 “Then I turned and went down the mountain while the mountain was burning with fire, and the two tablets of the covenant were in both my hands. 16 Then I looked and saw that you had sinned against Jehovah your God! You had made a metal calf for yourselves. You had turned aside quickly from the path Jehovah had commanded you to follow. 17 So I took hold of the two tablets and threw them down with both my hands and shattered them before your eyes. 18 Then I prostrated myself before Jehovah, as at first, for 40 days and 40 nights. I neither ate food nor drank water, because of all the sins that you had committed by your doing what was evil in Jehovah’s eyes and offending him. 19 For I was terrified because of Jehovah’s great anger against you, in that he was ready to annihilate you. However, Jehovah listened to me that time also.20 “Jehovah was so angry with Aaron that he was ready to annihilate him, but I made supplication for Aaron at that time also. 21 Then I took the sinful thing you made, the calf, and burned it up in the fire; I crushed it and ground it thoroughly until it was fine like dust, and I threw the dust into the stream that flows down from the mountain.22 “Further, at Tabʹe·rah, at Masʹsah, and at Kibʹroth-hat·taʹa·vah, you also provoked Jehovah to anger. 23 When Jehovah sent you out of Kaʹdesh-barʹne·a and said, ‘Go up and take possession of the land that I will certainly give you!’ you again rebelled against the order of Jehovah your God, and you did not exercise faith in him and did not obey him. 24 You have rebelled against Jehovah ever since I have known you.25 “So I kept prostrating myself before Jehovah 40 days and 40 nights, for I prostrated myself in this way because Jehovah said he would annihilate you. 26 I began to make supplication to Jehovah and to say, ‘O Sovereign Lord Jehovah, do not bring your people to ruin. They are your personal possession, whom you redeemed through your greatness and brought out of Egypt with a mighty hand. 27 Remember your servants Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Do not pay attention to the stubbornness of this people, their wickedness, and their sin. 28 Otherwise the people of the land from which you brought us may say: “Jehovah was unable to bring them into the land that he promised them, and because he hated them, he brought them out to put them to death in the wilderness.” 29 For they are your people and your personal possession, whom you brought out with your great power and your outstretched arm.’
1 These are the words that Moses spoke to all Israel in the region of the Jordan in the wilderness, on the desert plains in front of Suph, between Paʹran, Toʹphel, Laʹban, Ha·zeʹroth, and Diʹza·hab. 2 It is 11 days from Hoʹreb to Kaʹdesh-barʹne·a by way of Mount Seʹir. 3 In the 40th year, in the 11th month, on the first of the month, Moses spoke to the Israelites according to all that Jehovah had instructed him to tell them. 4 This was after he defeated Siʹhon the king of the Amʹor·ites, who was dwelling in Heshʹbon, and Og the king of Baʹshan, who was dwelling in Ashʹta·roth, in Edʹre·i. 5 In the region of the Jordan in the land of Moʹab, Moses undertook to explain this Law, saying:6 “Jehovah our God told us in Hoʹreb, ‘You have stayed long enough in this mountainous region. 7 Turn and set out for the mountainous region of the Amʹor·ites and toward all their neighbors in the Arʹa·bah, the mountainous region, the She·pheʹlah, the Negʹeb, and the seacoast, the land of the Caʹnaan·ites, and Lebʹa·non, up to the great river, the river Eu·phraʹtes. 8 See, I have set the land before you. Go in and take possession of the land about which Jehovah swore to your fathers, to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, to give it to them and their offspring after them.’9 “And I told you at that time, ‘I am not able to carry you by myself. 10 Jehovah your God has multiplied you, and here you are today as numerous as the stars of the heavens. 11 May Jehovah, the God of your forefathers, multiply you a thousand times as many as you are, and may he bless you just as he has promised you. 12 How can I bear by myself the burden of you and the load of you and your quarreling? 13 Select wise, discreet, and experienced men of your tribes, and I will appoint them as heads over you.’ 14 You answered me, ‘What you have told us to do is good.’ 15 So I took the heads of your tribes, wise and experienced men, and appointed them as heads over you, chiefs of thousands, chiefs of hundreds, chiefs of fifties, chiefs of tens, and officers of your tribes.16 “At that time I instructed your judges, ‘When you hear a case between your brothers, you are to judge with righteousness between a man and his brother or a foreign resident. 17 You must not be partial in judgment. You should hear the small one the same as the great one. You must not become intimidated by men, for the judgment belongs to God; and if a case is too difficult for you, you should present it to me, and I will hear it.’ 18 At that time I instructed you regarding all the things that you should do.19 “Then we departed from Hoʹreb and marched through all that great and fearsome wilderness that you saw on the way to the mountainous region of the Amʹor·ites, just as Jehovah our God had commanded us, and we eventually came to Kaʹdesh-barʹne·a. 20 I then said to you, ‘You have come to the mountainous region of the Amʹor·ites, which Jehovah our God is giving to us. 21 See, Jehovah your God has given the land over to you. Go up, take possession of it, just as Jehovah, the God of your forefathers, has told you. Do not be afraid or terrified.’22 “However, all of you approached me and said, ‘Let us send men ahead of us to search out the land for us and bring word back to us as to what route we should take and what kind of cities we will encounter.’ 23 The suggestion seemed good to me, so I selected 12 of your men, one for each tribe. 24 They left and went up into the mountainous region and reached the Valley of Eshʹcol and spied it out. 25 They took some of the fruitage of the land and carried it back to us, and they brought word back to us, ‘The land that Jehovah our God is giving us is good.’ 26 But you refused to go up, and you rebelled against the order of Jehovah your God. 27 You kept grumbling in your tents and were saying, ‘It was because Jehovah hated us that he brought us out of the land of Egypt to hand us over to the Amʹor·ites to annihilate us. 28 What kind of place are we going to? Our brothers made us lose heart by saying, “They are a people greater and taller than we are, and their cities are great and fortified to the heavens, and we saw the sons of the Anʹa·kim there.”’29 “So I said to you, ‘Do not be struck with terror or be afraid because of them. 30 Jehovah your God will go before you and will fight for you, just as he did in Egypt before your very eyes. 31 And you saw in the wilderness how Jehovah your God carried you just as a man carries his son, everywhere you went until you came to this place.’ 32 But despite all of this, you did not put faith in Jehovah your God, 33 who was going ahead of you on the way, to spy out a place for you to camp. He appeared by fire at night and by a cloud in the daytime to show you the way you should walk.34 “All the while Jehovah heard what you were saying, and he became indignant and solemnly swore, 35 ‘Not one of these men of this evil generation will see the good land that I swore to give to your fathers, 36 except Caʹleb the son of Je·phunʹneh. He will see it, and I will give the land on which he walked to him and to his sons, because he has followed Jehovah wholeheartedly. 37 (Jehovah even became angry with me because of you, and he said, “You too will not go in there. 38 Joshua the son of Nun, who stands before you, is the one who will enter into the land. Make him strong, for he will cause Israel to inherit it.”) 39 Moreover, your children who you said would become plunder and your sons who today do not know good or bad, these will enter, and I will give it to them to possess. 40 But as for you, turn back and depart for the wilderness by the way of the Red Sea.’41 “At this you said to me, ‘We have sinned against Jehovah. We will now go up and fight, just as Jehovah our God has commanded us!’ So each of you put on his weapons of war, and you thought it would be an easy thing to go up the mountain. 42 But Jehovah said to me, ‘Tell them: “You must not go up and fight, for I will not be with you. If you do, you will be defeated by your enemies.”’ 43 So I spoke to you, but you did not listen. Instead, you rebelled against Jehovah’s order and presumptuously tried to go up the mountain. 44 Then the Amʹor·ites who were dwelling in that mountain came out to meet you and chased you away like bees do, and they scattered you in Seʹir as far as Horʹmah. 45 So you returned and began to weep before Jehovah, but Jehovah did not listen to you or pay attention to you. 46 That is why you kept dwelling in Kaʹdesh for as long as you did.
10 As soon as King A·doʹni-zeʹdek of Jerusalem heard that Joshua had captured Aʹi and devoted it to destruction, doing to Aʹi and its king just as he had done to Jerʹi·cho and its king, and how the inhabitants of Gibʹe·on had made peace with Israel and remained among them, 2 he was greatly alarmed, because Gibʹe·on was a great city, like one of the royal cities. It was greater than Aʹi, and all its men were warriors. 3 So A·doʹni-zeʹdek king of Jerusalem sent this message to Hoʹham king of Hebʹron, Piʹram king of Jarʹmuth, Ja·phiʹa king of Laʹchish, and Deʹbir king of Egʹlon: 4 “Come to my aid, and let us attack Gibʹe·on, because it has made peace with Joshua and the Israelites.” 5 At this the five kings of the Amʹor·ites—the king of Jerusalem, the king of Hebʹron, the king of Jarʹmuth, the king of Laʹchish, and the king of Egʹlon—gathered together along with their armies, and they marched on and encamped against Gibʹe·on to fight against it.6 Then the men of Gibʹe·on sent word to Joshua at the camp at Gilʹgal: “Do not forsake your slaves. Come quickly! Rescue us and help us! All the kings of the Amʹor·ites from the mountainous region have gathered against us.” 7 So Joshua went up from Gilʹgal with all the fighting men and the mighty warriors.8 Jehovah then said to Joshua: “Do not be afraid of them, for I have handed them over to you. Not one of them will be able to stand against you.” 9 Joshua came against them by surprise after marching all night long from Gilʹgal. 10 Jehovah threw them into confusion before Israel, and they inflicted a great slaughter on them at Gibʹe·on, pursuing them by way of the ascent of Beth-hoʹron and striking them down as far as A·zeʹkah and Mak·keʹdah. 11 While they were fleeing from Israel and were on the descent of Beth-hoʹron, Jehovah hurled great hailstones from the sky on them as far as A·zeʹkah, and they perished. In fact, more died from the hail than from the sword of the Israelites.12 It was then, on the day that Jehovah routed the Amʹor·ites before the eyes of the Israelites, that Joshua said to Jehovah before Israel:“Sun, stand still over Gibʹe·on,And moon, over the Valley of Aiʹja·lon!”13 So the sun stood still and the moon did not move until the nation could take vengeance on its enemies. Is it not written in the book of Jaʹshar? The sun stood still in the middle of the sky and did not hasten to set for about a whole day. 14 There has never been a day like that one, either before it or after it, when Jehovah listened to the voice of a man, for Jehovah was fighting for Israel.15 After that Joshua together with all Israel returned to the camp at Gilʹgal.16 Meanwhile, the five kings fled and hid in the cave at Mak·keʹdah. 17 Then it was reported to Joshua: “The five kings have been found hiding in the cave at Mak·keʹdah.” 18 So Joshua said: “Roll large stones over the mouth of the cave and assign men to guard them. 19 But the rest of you should not stop. Pursue your enemies and strike them from the rear. Do not allow them to enter into their cities, for Jehovah your God has given them into your hands.”20 After Joshua and the Israelites had finished inflicting a very great slaughter on them, to the point of wiping them out except for some survivors who escaped and entered into the fortified cities, 21 all the people returned safely to Joshua at the camp at Mak·keʹdah. Not a man dared to utter a word against the Israelites. 22 Then Joshua said: “Open the mouth of the cave and bring the five kings out of the cave to me.” 23 So they brought to him from the cave these five kings: the king of Jerusalem, the king of Hebʹron, the king of Jarʹmuth, the king of Laʹchish, and the king of Egʹlon. 24 When they brought these kings to Joshua, he summoned all the men of Israel and said to the commanders of the fighting men who had gone with him: “Come forward. Place your feet on the backs of the necks of these kings.” So they came forward and placed their feet on the backs of their necks. 25 Then Joshua said to them: “Do not be afraid or be terrified. Be courageous and strong, for this is what Jehovah will do to all your enemies against whom you are fighting.”26 Then Joshua struck them and put them to death and hung them on five stakes, and they remained hanging on the stakes until the evening. 27 At sunset Joshua ordered that they be taken down off the stakes and thrown into the cave where they had hidden themselves. Then large stones were placed at the mouth of the cave, and these remain to this very day.28 Joshua captured Mak·keʹdah on that day and struck it with the sword. He devoted its king and everyone in it to destruction, letting no survivor remain. He did to the king of Mak·keʹdah just as he had done to the king of Jerʹi·cho.29 Then Joshua together with all Israel went from Mak·keʹdah to Libʹnah and fought against Libʹnah. 30 Jehovah also gave it and its king into Israel’s hand, and they struck it and everyone in it with the sword, not letting a survivor remain in it. So they did to its king just as they had done to the king of Jerʹi·cho.31 Next Joshua together with all Israel went from Libʹnah to Laʹchish and camped there and fought against it. 32 Jehovah gave Laʹchish into Israel’s hand, and they captured it on the second day. They struck it and everyone in it with the sword, just as they had done to Libʹnah.33 Then Hoʹram king of Geʹzer went up to help Laʹchish, but Joshua struck him and his people down until not one survivor remained.34 Then Joshua together with all Israel went from Laʹchish to Egʹlon and camped there and fought against it. 35 They captured it on that day and struck it with the sword. They devoted everyone in it to destruction on that day, just as they had done to Laʹchish.36 Then Joshua together with all Israel went up from Egʹlon to Hebʹron and fought against it. 37 They captured it and struck it, its king, its towns, and everyone in it with the sword, not letting any survivor remain. Just as he had done to Egʹlon, he devoted it and everyone in it to destruction.38 Finally Joshua together with all Israel turned toward Deʹbir and fought against it. 39 He captured it, its king, and all its towns, and they struck them down with the sword, devoting everyone in it to destruction, not letting any survivor remain. He did to Deʹbir and its king just as he had done to Hebʹron and to Libʹnah and its king.40 Joshua conquered all the land of the mountainous region, the Negʹeb, the She·pheʹlah, and the slopes, and all their kings, not letting any survivor remain; he devoted everything that breathed to destruction, just as Jehovah the God of Israel had commanded. 41 Joshua conquered them from Kaʹdesh-barʹne·a to Gazʹa and all the land of Goʹshen and up to Gibʹe·on. 42 Joshua captured all these kings and their land, all at the same time, because it was Jehovah the God of Israel who was fighting for Israel. 43 Then Joshua returned with all Israel to the camp at Gilʹgal.
11 As soon as Jaʹbin king of Haʹzor heard of it, he sent word to Joʹbab king of Maʹdon, and to the king of Shimʹron, the king of Achʹshaph, 2 the kings who were in the northern mountainous region, those in the plains south of Chinʹne·reth, those in the She·pheʹlah and on the slopes of Dor to the west, 3 the Caʹnaan·ites to the east and the west, the Amʹor·ites, the Hitʹtites, the Perʹiz·zites, the Jebʹu·sites in the mountainous region, and the Hiʹvites at the base of Herʹmon in the land of Mizʹpah. 4 So they came out with all their armies, a vast multitude as numerous as the grains of sand on the seashore, together with very many horses and war chariots. 5 All these kings agreed to meet, and they came and camped together at the waters of Merʹom to fight against Israel.6 At this Jehovah said to Joshua: “Do not be afraid because of them, for about this time tomorrow, I am giving over all of them slain to Israel. Their horses you must hamstring, and their chariots you must burn in the fire.” 7 Joshua together with all the fighting men then launched a surprise attack against them along the waters of Merʹom. 8 Jehovah gave them into Israel’s hand, and they defeated them and pursued them as far as Great Siʹdon and Misʹre·photh-maʹim and the Valley of Mizʹpeh to the east, and they struck them down until no survivors remained. 9 Joshua then did to them just as Jehovah had told him; he hamstrung their horses and burned their chariots in the fire.10 Moreover, Joshua then returned and captured Haʹzor and struck down its king with the sword, because Haʹzor had formerly been the head of all these kingdoms. 11 They struck down everyone in it with the sword, devoting them to destruction. Not a breathing thing was left. Then he burned Haʹzor in the fire. 12 Joshua captured all the cities of these kings and defeated all their kings with the sword. He devoted them to destruction, just as Moses the servant of Jehovah had commanded. 13 However, Israel did not burn any of the cities that stood on their mounds except Haʹzor; it was the only one Joshua burned. 14 All the spoil of these cities and the livestock, the Israelites plundered for themselves. But they struck every human with the sword until they had annihilated each one. They did not let anyone who breathed remain. 15 Just as Jehovah had commanded Moses his servant, so Moses commanded Joshua, and so Joshua did. He left nothing undone of all that Jehovah had commanded Moses.16 Joshua conquered all this land, the mountainous region, all the Negʹeb, all the land of Goʹshen, the She·pheʹlah, the Arʹa·bah, and the mountainous region of Israel and its She·pheʹlah, 17 from Mount Haʹlak, which goes up to Seʹir, and as far as Baʹal-gad in the Valley of Lebʹa·non at the base of Mount Herʹmon, and he captured all their kings and defeated them, putting them to death. 18 Joshua waged war with all these kings for quite some time. 19 There was no city that made peace with the Israelites except the Hiʹvites inhabiting Gibʹe·on. They conquered all the others by war. 20 It was Jehovah who allowed their hearts to become stubborn so that they waged war against Israel, in order for him to devote them to destruction without any favorable consideration. They were to be annihilated, just as Jehovah had commanded Moses.21 At that time Joshua wiped out the Anʹa·kim from the mountainous region, from Hebʹron, Deʹbir, Aʹnab, and all the mountainous region of Judah and all the mountainous region of Israel. Joshua devoted them and their cities to destruction. 22 There were no Anʹa·kim left in the land of the Israelites; they remained only in Gazʹa, in Gath, and in Ashʹdod. 23 So Joshua took control of all the land, just as Jehovah had promised Moses, and then Joshua gave it as an inheritance to Israel by their shares to be divided among their tribes. And the land had rest from war.
12 Now these are the kings of the land whom the Israelites defeated, whose land they took possession of on the east side of the Jordan, from the Arʹnon Valley up to Mount Herʹmon and all the Arʹa·bah toward the east: 2 King Siʹhon of the Amʹor·ites, who lived in Heshʹbon and ruled from A·roʹer, which was on the rim of the Arʹnon Valley, and from the middle of the valley, and half of Gilʹe·ad as far as the Valley of Jabʹbok, the boundary of the Amʹmon·ites. 3 He also ruled over the Arʹa·bah as far as the Sea of Chinʹne·reth toward the east and as far as the Sea of the Arʹa·bah, the Salt Sea, to the east in the direction of Beth-jeshʹi·moth, and toward the south under the slopes of Pisʹgah.4 Also the territory of King Og of Baʹshan, who was one of the last of the Rephʹa·im and who lived in Ashʹta·roth and Edʹre·i 5 and ruled in Mount Herʹmon, in Salʹe·cah, and in all Baʹshan, as far as the boundary of the Geshʹur·ites and the Ma·acʹa·thites, and half of Gilʹe·ad, to the territory of King Siʹhon of Heshʹbon.6 Moses the servant of Jehovah and the Israelites defeated them, after which Moses the servant of Jehovah gave their land as a possession to the Reuʹben·ites, the Gadʹites, and the half tribe of Ma·nasʹseh.7 These are the kings of the land whom Joshua and the Israelites defeated on the west side of the Jordan, from Baʹal-gad in the Valley of Lebʹa·non and as far as Mount Haʹlak, which goes up to Seʹir, after which Joshua gave their land to the tribes of Israel as a possession by their shares, 8 in the mountainous region, in the She·pheʹlah, in the Arʹa·bah, on the slopes, in the wilderness, and in the Negʹeb—the land of the Hitʹtites, the Amʹor·ites, the Caʹnaan·ites, the Perʹiz·zites, the Hiʹvites, and the Jebʹu·sites:  9 The king of Jerʹi·cho, one; the king of Aʹi, which was beside Bethʹel, one;10 the king of Jerusalem, one; the king of Hebʹron, one;11 the king of Jarʹmuth, one; the king of Laʹchish, one;12 the king of Egʹlon, one; the king of Geʹzer, one;13 the king of Deʹbir, one; the king of Geʹder, one;14 the king of Horʹmah, one; the king of Aʹrad, one;15 the king of Libʹnah, one; the king of A·dulʹlam, one;16 the king of Mak·keʹdah, one; the king of Bethʹel, one;17 the king of Tapʹpu·ah, one; the king of Heʹpher, one;18 the king of Aʹphek, one; the king of Las·sharʹon, one;19 the king of Maʹdon, one; the king of Haʹzor, one;20 the king of Shimʹron-meʹron, one; the king of Achʹshaph, one;21 the king of Taʹa·nach, one; the king of Me·gidʹdo, one;22 the king of Keʹdesh, one; the king of Jokʹne·am in Carʹmel, one;23 the king of Dor on the slopes of Dor, one; the king of Goiʹim in Gilʹgal, one;24 the king of Tirʹzah, one; a total of 31 kings.
13 Now Joshua had grown old and was advanced in years. So Jehovah said to him: “You have grown old and are advanced in years; but much of the land remains to be taken in possession. 2 This is the land remaining: all the regions of the Phi·lisʹtines and all the Geshʹur·ites 3 (from the branch of the Nile that is east of Egypt up to the border of Ekʹron to the north, which used to be considered Caʹnaan·ite territory) including that of the five lords of the Phi·lisʹtines—the Gazʹites, the Ashʹdod·ites, the Ashʹke·lon·ites, the Gitʹtites, and the Ekʹron·ites; that of the Avʹvim 4 to the south; all the land of the Caʹnaan·ites; Me·arʹah, which belongs to the Si·doʹni·ans, as far as Aʹphek, to the border of the Amʹor·ites; 5 the land of the Geʹbal·ites and all of Lebʹa·non toward the east, from Baʹal-gad at the base of Mount Herʹmon to Leʹbo-haʹmath; 6 all the inhabitants of the mountainous region from Lebʹa·non to Misʹre·photh-maʹim; and all the Si·doʹni·ans. I will drive them out before the Israelites. You have only to assign it to Israel as an inheritance, just as I have commanded you. 7 Now you must apportion this land as an inheritance to the nine tribes and the half tribe of Ma·nasʹseh.”8 With the other half tribe, the Reuʹben·ites and the Gadʹites took their inheritance that Moses gave them on the east side of the Jordan, just as Moses the servant of Jehovah had given them: 9 from A·roʹer, which is on the rim of the Arʹnon Valley, and the city that is in the middle of the valley, and all the tableland of Medʹe·ba as far as Diʹbon; 10 and all the cities of King Siʹhon of the Amʹor·ites, who reigned in Heshʹbon, up to the border of the Amʹmon·ites; 11 also Gilʹe·ad and the territory of the Geshʹur·ites and the Ma·acʹa·thites and all Mount Herʹmon and all Baʹshan as far as Salʹe·cah; 12 all the royal realm of Og in Baʹshan, who reigned in Ashʹta·roth and in Edʹre·i. (He was one of the last of the Rephʹa·im.) Moses defeated them and drove them out. 13 But the Israelites did not drive out the Geshʹur·ites and the Ma·acʹa·thites, for Geshʹur and Maʹa·cath live in the midst of Israel to this day.14 It was only to the tribe of the Levites that he did not give an inheritance. The offerings made by fire to Jehovah the God of Israel are their inheritance, just as he promised them.15 Then Moses gave an inheritance to the tribe of the Reuʹben·ites by their families, 16 and their territory was from A·roʹer, which is on the rim of the Arʹnon Valley, and the city in the middle of the valley, and all the tableland by Medʹe·ba; 17 Heshʹbon and all its towns on the tableland, Diʹbon, Baʹmoth-baʹal, Beth-baʹal-meʹon, 18 Jaʹhaz, Kedʹe·moth, Mephʹa·ath, 19 Kir·i·a·thaʹim, Sibʹmah, and Zeʹreth-shaʹhar on the mountain of the valley, 20 Beth-peʹor, the slopes of Pisʹgah, Beth-jeshʹi·moth, 21 all the cities of the tableland, and all the royal realm of King Siʹhon of the Amʹor·ites, who reigned in Heshʹbon. Moses defeated him and the Midʹi·an·ite chieftains Eʹvi, Reʹkem, Zur, Hur, and Reʹba, vassals of Siʹhon who were dwelling in the land. 22 Baʹlaam the son of Beʹor, the diviner, was one whom the Israelites killed with the sword along with the rest who were slain. 23 The boundary of the Reuʹben·ites was the Jordan; and this territory was the inheritance of the Reuʹben·ites by their families, with the cities and their settlements.24 Furthermore, Moses gave an inheritance to the tribe of Gad, the Gadʹites by their families, 25 and their territory included Jaʹzer and all the cities of Gilʹe·ad and half of the land of the Amʹmon·ites as far as A·roʹer, which faces Rabʹbah; 26 and from Heshʹbon to Raʹmath-mizʹpeh and Betʹo·nim, and from Ma·ha·naʹim to the border of Deʹbir; 27 and in the valley, Beth-haʹram, Beth-nimʹrah, Sucʹcoth, and Zaʹphon, the rest of the royal realm of King Siʹhon of Heshʹbon, with the Jordan as the border from the lower end of the Sea of Chinʹne·reth on the east side of the Jordan. 28 This was the inheritance of the Gadʹites by their families, with the cities and their settlements.29 Further, Moses gave an inheritance to the half tribe of Ma·nasʹseh, to half of the tribe of Ma·nasʹseh by their families. 30 And their territory extended from Ma·ha·naʹim and took in all of Baʹshan, all the royal realm of King Og of Baʹshan, and all the tent villages of Jaʹir in Baʹshan, 60 towns. 31 And half of Gilʹe·ad, and Ashʹta·roth and Edʹre·i, the cities of the royal realm of Og in Baʹshan, went to the sons of Maʹchir the son of Ma·nasʹseh, to half of the sons of Maʹchir by their families.32 These were the inheritances that Moses gave them on the desert plains of Moʹab beyond the Jordan, east of Jerʹi·cho.33 But to the tribe of the Levites, Moses did not give an inheritance. Jehovah the God of Israel is their inheritance, just as he promised them.
14 Now this is what the Israelites took as an inheritance in the land of Caʹnaan, which El·e·aʹzar the priest and Joshua the son of Nun and the heads of the paternal houses of the tribes of Israel gave them to inherit. 2 Their inheritance was by lot, just as Jehovah had commanded through Moses for the nine and a half tribes. 3 Moses had given the inheritance of the other two and a half tribes on the other side of the Jordan, and to the Levites he did not give an inheritance among them. 4 The descendants of Joseph were considered two tribes, Ma·nasʹseh and Eʹphra·im; and they did not give a share in the land to the Levites, except cities to dwell in and their pastures for their livestock and their property. 5 So the Israelites apportioned the land just as Jehovah had commanded Moses.6 Then the men of Judah approached Joshua in Gilʹgal, and Caʹleb the son of Je·phunʹneh the Kenʹiz·zite said to him: “You well know what Jehovah said to Moses the man of the true God about you and me at Kaʹdesh-barʹne·a. 7 I was 40 years old when Moses the servant of Jehovah sent me out of Kaʹdesh-barʹne·a to spy out the land, and I returned with a forthright report. 8 Although my brothers who went up with me caused the people to lose heart, I followed Jehovah my God wholeheartedly. 9 Moses swore on that day, saying: ‘The land on which your foot has walked will become a lasting inheritance for you and your sons, because you have followed Jehovah my God wholeheartedly.’ 10 Now just as he promised, Jehovah has preserved me alive these 45 years since Jehovah made this promise to Moses when Israel walked in the wilderness; I am still here today, 85 years old. 11 And today I am as strong as on the day Moses sent me out. My strength is now as it was then, for war and for other activities. 12 Therefore, give me this mountainous region that Jehovah promised on that day. Though you heard on that day that there were Anʹa·kim there with great fortified cities, surely Jehovah will be with me, and I will drive them out, just as Jehovah promised.”13 So Joshua blessed him and gave Hebʹron to Caʹleb the son of Je·phunʹneh as an inheritance. 14 That is why Hebʹron belongs to Caʹleb the son of Je·phunʹneh the Kenʹiz·zite as an inheritance to this day, because he followed Jehovah the God of Israel wholeheartedly. 15 The name of Hebʹron was previously Kirʹi·ath-arʹba (Arʹba was the great man among the Anʹa·kim). And the land had rest from war.
15 The land allotted to the tribe of Judah for their families extended to the boundary of Eʹdom, the wilderness of Zin, to the Negʹeb at its southern end. 2 Their southern boundary ran from the extremity of the Salt Sea, from the bay that faces southward. 3 And it extended south to the ascent of A·krabʹbim, passed over to Zin, then went up from the south to Kaʹdesh-barʹne·a, over to Hezʹron, up to Adʹdar, and went around toward Karʹka. 4 Then it passed on to Azʹmon and extended to the Wadi of Egypt, and the boundary ended at the Sea. This was their southern boundary.5 The eastern boundary was the Salt Sea up to the end of the Jordan, and the boundary at the northern corner was at the bay of the sea, at the end of the Jordan. 6 The boundary went up to Beth-hogʹlah and passed over at the north of Beth-arʹa·bah, and the boundary went up to the stone of Boʹhan the son of Reuʹben. 7 The boundary went up to Deʹbir at the Valley of Aʹchor and turned northward to Gilʹgal, which is in front of the ascent of A·dumʹmim that is south of the wadi, and the boundary passed over to the waters of En-sheʹmesh and ended at En-roʹgel. 8 The boundary went up to the Valley of the Son of Hinʹnom to the slope of the Jebʹu·site at the south, that is, Jerusalem, and the boundary went up to the top of the mountain that faces the Valley of Hinʹnom to the west, which is at the extremity of the Valley of Rephʹa·im to the north. 9 And the boundary was marked from the top of the mountain to the spring of the waters of Neph·toʹah and extended to the cities of Mount Eʹphron; and the boundary was marked to Baʹal·ah, that is, Kirʹi·ath-jeʹa·rim. 10 The boundary went around from Baʹal·ah westward to Mount Seʹir and passed over to the slope of Mount Jeʹa·rim at the north, that is, Chesʹa·lon, and it went down to Beth-sheʹmesh and passed over to Timʹnah. 11 And the boundary extended to the slope of Ekʹron to the north, and the boundary was marked to Shikʹke·ron and passed over to Mount Baʹal·ah and extended to Jabʹne·el, and the boundary ended at the sea.12 The western boundary was at the Great Sea and its coast. This was the boundary of the descendants of Judah by their families on all sides.13 And to Caʹleb the son of Je·phunʹneh, he gave a share among the descendants of Judah at the order of Jehovah to Joshua, namely, Kirʹi·ath-arʹba (Arʹba was the father of Aʹnak), that is, Hebʹron. 14 So Caʹleb drove out from there the three sons of Aʹnak: Sheʹshai, A·hiʹman, and Talʹmai, descendants of Aʹnak. 15 Then he went up from there against the inhabitants of Deʹbir. (The name of Deʹbir was previously Kirʹi·ath-seʹpher.) 16 Caʹleb then said: “To the man who strikes Kirʹi·ath-seʹpher and captures it, I will give my daughter Achʹsah as a wife.” 17 And Othʹni·el the son of Keʹnaz, Caʹleb’s brother, captured it. So he gave him his daughter Achʹsah as a wife. 18 While she was going home, she urged him to ask her father for a field. Then she dismounted from her donkey. Caʹleb asked her: “What do you want?” 19 She said: “Please grant me a blessing, for you have given me a piece of land in the south; give me also Gulʹloth-maʹim.” So he gave her Upper Gulʹloth and Lower Gulʹloth.20 This was the inheritance of the tribe of Judah by their families.21 The cities at the extremity of the tribe of Judah toward the boundary of Eʹdom in the south were: Kabʹze·el, Eʹder, Jaʹgur, 22 Kiʹnah, Di·moʹnah, A·daʹdah, 23 Keʹdesh, Haʹzor, Ithʹnan, 24 Ziph, Teʹlem, Be·aʹloth, 25 Haʹzor-ha·datʹtah, and Keʹri·oth-hezʹron, that is, Haʹzor, 26 Aʹmam, Sheʹma, Mo·laʹdah, 27 Haʹzar-gadʹdah, Heshʹmon, Beth-pelʹet, 28 Haʹzar-shuʹal, Beʹer-sheʹba, Biz·i·o·thiʹah, 29 Baʹal·ah, Iʹim, Eʹzem, 30 El·toʹlad, Cheʹsil, Horʹmah, 31 Zikʹlag, Mad·manʹnah, San·sanʹnah, 32 Le·baʹoth, Shilʹhim, Aʹin, and Rimʹmon—a total of 29 cities together with their settlements.33 In the She·pheʹlah, there were: Eshʹta·ol, Zoʹrah, Ashʹnah, 34 Za·noʹah, En-ganʹnim, Tapʹpu·ah, Eʹnam, 35 Jarʹmuth, A·dulʹlam, Soʹcoh, A·zeʹkah, 36 Shaʹa·raʹim, Ad·i·thaʹim, and Ge·deʹrah and Ged·e·ro·thaʹim—14 cities and their settlements.37 Zeʹnan, Ha·dashʹah, Migʹdal-gad, 38 Diʹle·an, Mizʹpeh, Jokʹthe·el, 39 Laʹchish, Bozʹkath, Egʹlon, 40 Cabʹbon, Lahʹmam, Chitʹlish, 41 Ge·deʹroth, Beth-daʹgon, Naʹa·mah, and Mak·keʹdah—16 cities and their settlements.42 Libʹnah, Eʹther, Aʹshan, 43 Iphʹtah, Ashʹnah, Neʹzib, 44 Keiʹlah, Achʹzib, and Ma·reʹshah—nine cities and their settlements.45 Ekʹron and its dependent towns and its settlements; 46 from Ekʹron westward, all that is alongside Ashʹdod and their settlements.47 Ashʹdod, its dependent towns and its settlements; Gazʹa, its dependent towns and its settlements, down to the Wadi of Egypt, the Great Sea, and the adjacent region.48 And in the mountainous region, Shaʹmir, Jatʹtir, Soʹcoh, 49 Danʹnah, Kirʹi·ath-sanʹnah, that is, Deʹbir, 50 Aʹnab, Eshʹte·moh, Aʹnim, 51 Goʹshen, Hoʹlon, and Giʹloh—11 cities and their settlements.52 Arab, Duʹmah, Eʹshan, 53 Jaʹnim, Beth-tapʹpu·ah, A·pheʹkah, 54 Humʹtah, Kirʹi·ath-arʹba, that is, Hebʹron, and Ziʹor—nine cities and their settlements.55 Maʹon, Carʹmel, Ziph, Jutʹtah, 56 Jezʹre·el, Jokʹde·am, Za·noʹah, 57 Kaʹin, Gibʹe·ah, and Timʹnah—ten cities and their settlements.58 Halʹhul, Beth-zur, Geʹdor, 59 Maʹa·rath, Beth-aʹnoth, and Elʹte·kon—six cities and their settlements.60 Kirʹi·ath-baʹal, that is, Kirʹi·ath-jeʹa·rim, and Rabʹbah—two cities and their settlements.61 In the wilderness, Beth-arʹa·bah, Midʹdin, Se·caʹcah, 62 Nibʹshan, the City of Salt, and En-gedʹi—six cities and their settlements.63 As for the Jebʹu·sites who were dwelling in Jerusalem, the men of Judah were not able to drive them away, so the Jebʹu·sites continue dwelling with the people of Judah in Jerusalem to this day.
16 And the land that fell by lot to the descendants of Joseph was from the Jordan at Jerʹi·cho to the waters east of Jerʹi·cho, through the wilderness going up from Jerʹi·cho into the mountainous region of Bethʹel. 2 It extended from Bethʹel belonging to Luz and continued to the boundary of the Arʹchites at Atʹa·roth, 3 then it went down westward to the boundary of the Japhʹle·tites as far as the boundary of Lower Beth-hoʹron and Geʹzer, and it ended at the sea.4 So Joseph’s descendants, Ma·nasʹseh and Eʹphra·im, took possession of their land. 5 The boundary of the descendants of Eʹphra·im by their families was as follows: The boundary of their inheritance to the east was Atʹa·roth-adʹdar, as far as Upper Beth-hoʹron, 6 and the boundary extended to the sea. Mich·meʹthath was on the north, and the boundary went around east to Taʹa·nath-shiʹloh, and it passed on the east to Ja·noʹah. 7 Then it went down from Ja·noʹah to Atʹa·roth and Naʹa·rah and reached to Jerʹi·cho and extended to the Jordan. 8 From Tapʹpu·ah the boundary continued westward to the Wadi of Kaʹnah, and it ended at the sea. This is the inheritance of the tribe of Eʹphra·im by their families; 9 the descendants of Eʹphra·im also had enclave cities in the midst of the inheritance of Ma·nasʹseh, all the cities and their settlements.10 But they did not drive away the Caʹnaan·ites who were dwelling in Geʹzer, and the Caʹnaan·ites continue to dwell among Eʹphra·im to this day and have been subjected to forced labor.
17 Then the lot fell for the tribe of Ma·nasʹseh, because he was Joseph’s firstborn. Since Maʹchir, the firstborn of Ma·nasʹseh and the father of Gilʹe·ad, was a man of war, he received Gilʹe·ad and Baʹshan. 2 And the lot fell for the rest of the descendants of Ma·nasʹseh according to their families, for the sons of Abi-eʹzer, the sons of Heʹlek, the sons of Asʹri·el, the sons of Sheʹchem, the sons of Heʹpher, and the sons of She·miʹda. These were the descendants of Ma·nasʹseh the son of Joseph, the males according to their families. 3 But Ze·loʹphe·had the son of Heʹpher, the son of Gilʹe·ad, the son of Maʹchir, the son of Ma·nasʹseh, did not have sons, only daughters, and these were the names of his daughters: Mahʹlah, Noah, Hogʹlah, Milʹcah, and Tirʹzah. 4 So they presented themselves before El·e·aʹzar the priest, Joshua the son of Nun, and the chieftains, saying: “It was Jehovah who commanded Moses to give us an inheritance among our brothers.” So at the order of Jehovah, he gave them an inheritance among the brothers of their father.5 There were also ten allotments that fell to Ma·nasʹseh apart from the land of Gilʹe·ad and Baʹshan, which were on the other side of the Jordan, 6 for the daughters of Ma·nasʹseh received an inheritance along with his sons, and the land of Gilʹe·ad became the property of the rest of the descendants of Ma·nasʹseh.7 And the boundary of Ma·nasʹseh was from Ashʹer to Mich·meʹthath, which faces Sheʹchem, and the boundary continued toward the south to the land of the inhabitants of En-Tapʹpu·ah. 8 The land of Tapʹpu·ah became Ma·nasʹseh’s, but Tapʹpu·ah on Ma·nasʹseh’s boundary belonged to the descendants of Eʹphra·im. 9 And the boundary went down to the Wadi of Kaʹnah, southward to the wadi. There were cities of Eʹphra·im among the cities of Ma·nasʹseh, and the boundary of Ma·nasʹseh was on the north of the wadi, and it ended at the sea. 10 To the south it belonged to Eʹphra·im, and to the north it belonged to Ma·nasʹseh, and the sea was his boundary, and on the north they reached to Ashʹer, and on the east, to Isʹsa·char.11 In the territories of Isʹsa·char and Ashʹer, Ma·nasʹseh was given Beth-sheʹan and its dependent towns, Ibʹle·am and its dependent towns, the inhabitants of Dor and its dependent towns, the inhabitants of En-dor and its dependent towns, the inhabitants of Taʹa·nach and its dependent towns, and the inhabitants of Me·gidʹdo and its dependent towns, three of the heights.12 But the descendants of Ma·nasʹseh were not able to take possession of these cities; the Caʹnaan·ites persisted in dwelling in this land. 13 When the Israelites grew strong, they subjected the Caʹnaan·ites to forced labor, but they did not drive them out entirely.14 The descendants of Joseph said to Joshua: “Why have you given us as an inheritance only one lot and one allotment? We are a numerous people, for Jehovah has blessed us until now.” 15 Joshua replied to them: “If you are such a numerous people, go up to the forest and clear out a place for yourself there in the land of the Perʹiz·zites and the Rephʹa·im, since the mountainous region of Eʹphra·im is too cramped for you.” 16 Then the descendants of Joseph said: “The mountainous region is not enough for us, and all the Caʹnaan·ites who are dwelling in the land of the valley have war chariots with iron scythes, both those in Beth-sheʹan and its dependent towns and those in the Valley of Jezʹre·el.” 17 So Joshua said this to the house of Joseph, to Eʹphra·im and Ma·nasʹseh: “You are a numerous people, and you have great power. You will not receive only one lot, 18 but the mountainous region will also be yours. Although it is a forest, you will clear it, and it will be the extremity of your territory. For you will drive away the Caʹnaan·ites, even though they are strong and have war chariots with iron scythes.”
18 Then all the assembly of the Israelites congregated at Shiʹloh, and they set up the tent of meeting there, as the land was now subdued before them. 2 But there were still seven tribes left of the Israelites whose inheritance had not been allotted. 3 So Joshua said to the Israelites: “How long will you put off going in to take possession of the land that Jehovah the God of your forefathers has given you? 4 Give me three men from each tribe to send out; they should go out and walk throughout the land and map it out according to their inheritance. Then they should return to me. 5 They must apportion it among themselves into seven shares. Judah will remain in his territory to the south, and the house of Joseph will remain in their territory to the north. 6 As for you, map out the land into seven shares, and bring them here to me, and I will cast lots here for you before Jehovah our God. 7 But the Levites have no share among you, because the priesthood of Jehovah is their inheritance; and Gad, Reuʹben, and the half tribe of Ma·nasʹseh have already taken their inheritance on the east side of the Jordan, which Moses the servant of Jehovah gave them.”8 The men prepared to go, and Joshua commanded those who were to map out the land: “Go and walk through the land and map it out and return to me, and I will cast lots for you here before Jehovah in Shiʹloh.” 9 With that the men went and traveled through the land and mapped it out by cities into seven shares, recording it in a book. After that they returned to Joshua at the camp in Shiʹloh. 10 Joshua then cast lots for them in Shiʹloh before Jehovah. There Joshua apportioned the land to the Israelites by their shares.11 The lot came up for the tribe of Benjamin by their families, and the territory of their lot was between the people of Judah and the people of Joseph. 12 On the north side, their boundary started at the Jordan, and the boundary went up to the slope of Jerʹi·cho on the north and went up on the mountain westward, and it extended to the wilderness of Beth-aʹven. 13 And the boundary continued from there to Luz, at the southern slope of Luz, that is, Bethʹel; the boundary went down to Atʹa·roth-adʹdar on the mountain that is south of Lower Beth-hoʹron. 14 And the boundary was marked at the western side and went around toward the south from the mountain that faces Beth-hoʹron to the south; it ended at Kirʹi·ath-baʹal, that is, Kirʹi·ath-jeʹa·rim, a city of Judah. This is the western side.15 The south side was from the extremity of Kirʹi·ath-jeʹa·rim, and the boundary extended westward; it went out to the spring of the waters of Neph·toʹah. 16 The boundary went down to the extremity of the mountain that faces the Valley of the Son of Hinʹnom, which is in the Valley of Rephʹa·im to the north, and it went down to the Valley of Hinʹnom, to the slope of the Jebʹu·site on the south, and down to En-roʹgel. 17 And it was marked northward and extended to En-sheʹmesh and then out to Gel·iʹloth, which is in front of the ascent of A·dumʹmim, and it went down to the stone of Boʹhan the son of Reuʹben. 18 And it continued to the northern slope in front of the Arʹa·bah and went down to the Arʹa·bah. 19 And the boundary continued to the northern slope of Beth-hogʹlah, and the boundary ended at the northern bay of the Salt Sea at the southern end of the Jordan. This was the southern boundary. 20 And the Jordan served as its boundary on the eastern side. This was the inheritance of the descendants of Benjamin by their families, according to its boundaries on all sides.21 And the cities of the tribe of Benjamin by their families were: Jerʹi·cho, Beth-hogʹlah, Eʹmek-keʹziz, 22 Beth-arʹa·bah, Zem·a·raʹim, Bethʹel, 23 Avʹvim, Paʹrah, Ophʹrah, 24 Cheʹphar-amʹmo·ni, Ophʹni, and Geʹba—12 cities and their settlements.25 Gibʹe·on, Raʹmah, Be·erʹoth, 26 Mizʹpeh, Che·phiʹrah, Moʹzah, 27 Reʹkem, Irʹpe·el, Tarʹa·lah, 28 Zeʹlah, Ha-eʹleph, Je·buʹsi, that is, Jerusalem, Gibʹe·ah, and Kirʹi·ath—14 cities and their settlements.This was the inheritance of the descendants of Benjamin by their families.
19 Then the second lot came out for Simʹe·on, for the tribe of Simʹe·on by their families. And their inheritance was within the inheritance of Judah. 2 Their inheritance was Beʹer-sheʹba with Sheʹba, Mo·laʹdah, 3 Haʹzar-shuʹal, Baʹlah, Eʹzem, 4 El·toʹlad, Beʹthul, Horʹmah, 5 Zikʹlag, Beth-marʹca·both, Haʹzar-suʹsah, 6 Beth-le·baʹoth, and Sha·ruʹhen—13 cities and their settlements; 7 Aʹin, Rimʹmon, Eʹther, and Aʹshan—four cities and their settlements; 8 and all the settlements that were around these cities as far as Baʹal·ath-beʹer, Raʹmah of the south. This was the inheritance of the tribe of Simʹe·on by their families. 9 The inheritance of the descendants of Simʹe·on was taken out of the allotment of Judah, because the share of Judah was too large for them. So the descendants of Simʹe·on received a possession within their inheritance.10 Next the third lot came up for the descendants of Zebʹu·lun by their families, and the boundary of their inheritance went as far as Saʹrid. 11 Their boundary went up westward to Marʹe·al and reached to Dabʹbe·sheth and then to the valley in front of Jokʹne·am. 12 And it went from Saʹrid eastward toward the sunrise, to the border of Chisʹloth-taʹbor and out to Dabʹe·rath and then up to Ja·phiʹa. 13 And from there it continued eastward toward the sunrise to Gath-heʹpher, to Eth-kaʹzin, and out to Rimʹmon, and it extended to Neʹah. 14 And the boundary went around it on the north to Hanʹna·thon, and it ended at the Valley of Iphʹtah-el, 15 and Katʹtath, Na·halʹal, Shimʹron, Iʹda·lah, and Bethʹle·hem—12 cities and their settlements. 16 This was the inheritance of the descendants of Zebʹu·lun by their families. These were the cities and their settlements.17 The fourth lot came out for Isʹsa·char, for the descendants of Isʹsa·char by their families. 18 And their boundary was to Jezʹre·el, Che·sulʹloth, Shuʹnem, 19 Haphʹa·raʹim, Shiʹon, An·a·haʹrath, 20 Rabʹbith, Kishʹi·on, Eʹbez, 21 Reʹmeth, En-ganʹnim, En-hadʹdah, and Beth-pazʹzez. 22 And the boundary reached to Taʹbor and Sha·ha·zuʹmah and Beth-sheʹmesh, and the end of their border was at the Jordan—16 cities and their settlements. 23 This was the inheritance of the tribe of Isʹsa·char by their families, the cities and their settlements.24 Then the fifth lot came out for the tribe of Ashʹer by their families. 25 And their boundary was Helʹkath, Haʹli, Beʹten, Achʹshaph, 26 Al·lamʹme·lech, Aʹmad, and Miʹshal. It reached westward to Carʹmel and to Shiʹhor-libʹnath, 27 and it went back toward the east to Beth-daʹgon and reached to Zebʹu·lun and the Valley of Iphʹtah-el to the north, to Beth-eʹmek and Ne·iʹel, and it extended to Caʹbul on the left, 28 and to Eʹbron, Reʹhob, Hamʹmon, and Kaʹnah as far as Great Siʹdon. 29 And the boundary went back to Raʹmah and as far as the fortified city of Tyre. Then the boundary went back to Hoʹsah, and it ended at the sea in the region of Achʹzib, 30 Umʹmah, Aʹphek, and Reʹhob—22 cities and their settlements. 31 This was the inheritance of the tribe of Ashʹer by their families. These were the cities and their settlements.32 The sixth lot came out for the descendants of Naphʹta·li, for the descendants of Naphʹta·li by their families. 33 Their boundary was from Heʹleph, from the big tree in Za·a·nanʹnim, and Adʹa·mi-neʹkeb and Jabʹne·el as far as Lakʹkum; and it ended at the Jordan. 34 The boundary went back westward to Azʹnoth-taʹbor and extended from there to Hukʹkok and reached to Zebʹu·lun on the south and to Ashʹer on the west and to Judah at the Jordan toward the east. 35 And the fortified cities were Zidʹdim, Zer, Hamʹmath, Rakʹkath, Chinʹne·reth, 36 Adʹa·mah, Raʹmah, Haʹzor, 37 Keʹdesh, Edʹre·i, En-haʹzor, 38 Yiʹron, Migʹdal-el, Hoʹrem, Beth-aʹnath, and Beth-sheʹmesh—19 cities and their settlements. 39 This was the inheritance of the tribe of Naphʹta·li by their families, the cities and their settlements.40 The seventh lot came out for the tribe of Dan by their families. 41 And the border of their inheritance was Zoʹrah, Eshʹta·ol, Ir-sheʹmesh, 42 Sha·al·abʹbin, Aiʹja·lon, Ithʹlah, 43 Eʹlon, Timʹnah, Ekʹron, 44 Elʹte·keh, Gibʹbe·thon, Baʹal·ath, 45 Jeʹhud, Benʹe-beʹrak, Gath-rimʹmon, 46 Me-jarʹkon, and Rakʹkon, with the border facing Jopʹpa. 47 But the territory of Dan was too cramped for them. So they went up and fought against Leʹshem and captured it and struck it with the sword. Then they took possession of it and settled in it, and they changed the name of Leʹshem to Dan, after the name of Dan their forefather. 48 This was the inheritance of the tribe of Dan by their families. These were the cities and their settlements.49 Thus they finished dividing the land for inheritance by its territories. Then the Israelites gave Joshua the son of Nun an inheritance in their midst. 50 At the order of Jehovah they gave him the city he asked for, Timʹnath-seʹrah, in the mountainous region of Eʹphra·im, and he built up the city and settled in it.51 These were the inheritances that El·e·aʹzar the priest, Joshua the son of Nun, and the heads of the paternal houses of the tribes of Israel distributed by lot in Shiʹloh before Jehovah, at the entrance of the tent of meeting. So they finished apportioning the land.
2 Then Joshua the son of Nun secretly sent two men out from Shitʹtim as spies. He told them: “Go and inspect the land, especially Jerʹi·cho.” So they went and came to the house of a prostitute named Raʹhab, and they stayed there. 2 The king of Jerʹi·cho was told: “Look! Israelite men have come in here tonight to spy out the land.” 3 At that the king of Jerʹi·cho sent word to Raʹhab: “Bring out the men who came and are staying in your house, for they have come to spy out the entire land.”4 But the woman took the two men and hid them. Then she said: “Yes, the men came to me, but I did not know where they were from. 5 And at dark when the city gate was about to be closed, the men went out. I do not know where the men went, but if you quickly chase after them, you will catch up with them.” 6 (However, she had taken them up to the roof and hidden them among stalks of flax laid in rows on the roof.) 7 So the men chased after them in the direction of the Jordan at the fords, and the city gate was shut once the pursuers had gone out.8 Before the men lay down to sleep, she came up to them on the roof. 9 She said to the men: “I do know that Jehovah will give you the land and that the fear of you has fallen upon us. All the inhabitants of the land are disheartened because of you, 10 for we heard how Jehovah dried up the waters of the Red Sea before you when you left Egypt and what you did to the two kings of the Amʹor·ites, Siʹhon and Og, whom you devoted to destruction on the other side of the Jordan. 11 When we heard about it, we lost heart, and no one has any courage because of you, for Jehovah your God is God in the heavens above and on the earth beneath. 12 Now, please, swear to me by Jehovah that, because I showed loyal love to you, you will also show loyal love to my father’s household; and you must give me a sign of good faith. 13 You must spare the lives of my father and mother, my brothers and sisters, and all who belong to them, and you must save us from death.”14 At that the men said to her: “We will give our lives for yours! If you do not tell about our mission, then we will show loyal love and faithfulness toward you when Jehovah gives us the land.” 15 After that she let them down by a rope through the window, for her house was on a side of the city wall. In fact, she was dwelling on the wall. 16 Then she said to them: “Go to the mountainous region and hide there for three days, so that those pursuing you may not find you. Then, after your pursuers have come back, you can go on your way.”17 The men said to her: “We will be free from guilt respecting this oath that you made us swear 18 unless, when we come into the land, you tie this cord of scarlet thread in the window by which you let us down. You should gather your father, your mother, your brothers, and all your father’s household with you into the house. 19 Then if anyone goes out the doors of your house into the open, his blood will be on his own head, and we will be free from guilt. But if harm comes to anyone who remains with you in the house, his blood will be on our heads. 20 But if you report our mission, we will be free from guilt respecting your oath that you made us swear.” 21 She replied: “Let it be according to your words.”With that she sent them off, and they went their way. Afterward, she tied the scarlet cord in the window. 22 So they left and went to the mountainous region and stayed there for three days, until the pursuers returned. The pursuers had been looking for them on every road but did not find them. 23 The two men then descended from the mountainous region and crossed the river and came to Joshua the son of Nun. They related to him all the things that had happened to them. 24 Then they said to Joshua: “Jehovah has handed over the entire land to us. In fact, all the inhabitants of the land are disheartened because of us.”
20 Then Jehovah said to Joshua: 2 “Tell the Israelites, ‘Select for yourselves the cities of refuge about which I spoke to you through Moses, 3 so that the manslayer who unintentionally or accidentally kills someone may flee there. And they will serve as a refuge for you from the avenger of blood. 4 He must flee to one of these cities and stand at the entrance of the city gate and present his case in the hearing of the elders of that city. Then they must receive him into the city and give him a place and he will live with them. 5 If the avenger of blood chases after him, they should not surrender the manslayer into his hand, for he killed his fellow man accidentally and he did not previously hate him. 6 He must dwell in that city until he stands trial before the assembly and remain there until the death of the high priest who is in office at that time. Then the manslayer may return to the city from which he fled, and he may enter his city and his house.’”7 So they gave a sacred status to Keʹdesh in Galʹi·lee in the mountainous region of Naphʹta·li, Sheʹchem in the mountainous region of Eʹphra·im, and Kirʹi·ath-arʹba, that is, Hebʹron, in the mountainous region of Judah. 8 In the region of the Jordan, east of Jerʹi·cho, they selected Beʹzer in the wilderness on the tableland out of the tribe of Reuʹben, Raʹmoth in Gilʹe·ad out of the tribe of Gad, and Goʹlan in Baʹshan out of the tribe of Ma·nasʹseh.9 These became the cities appointed for all the Israelites and for the foreign residents residing among them, so that anyone who unintentionally killed someone could flee there and not die by the hand of the avenger of blood prior to standing trial before the assembly.
21 The heads of the paternal houses of the Levites now approached El·e·aʹzar the priest, Joshua the son of Nun, and the heads of the paternal houses of the tribes of Israel, 2 and they spoke to them in Shiʹloh in the land of Caʹnaan, saying: “Jehovah through Moses commanded that we be given cities in which to dwell, along with their pastures for our livestock.” 3 So at the order of Jehovah, the Israelites gave the Levites these cities and their pastures out of their own inheritance.4 The lot came out for the families of the Koʹhath·ites, and the Levites who were descendants of Aaron the priest were given by lot 13 cities out of the tribe of Judah, the tribe of Simʹe·on, and the tribe of Benjamin.5 And for the rest of the Koʹhath·ites, there were allotted ten cities out of the families of the tribe of Eʹphra·im, the tribe of Dan, and the half tribe of Ma·nasʹseh.6 And for the Gerʹshon·ites, there were allotted 13 cities out of the families of the tribe of Isʹsa·char, the tribe of Ashʹer, the tribe of Naphʹta·li, and the half tribe of Ma·nasʹseh in Baʹshan.7 For the Me·rarʹites by their families, there were 12 cities out of the tribe of Reuʹben, the tribe of Gad, and the tribe of Zebʹu·lun.8 Thus the Israelites gave the Levites these cities and their pastures by lot, just as Jehovah had commanded through Moses.9 So from the tribe of Judah and the tribe of Simʹe·on, they gave these cities here mentioned by name, 10 and they were given to the sons of Aaron of the Koʹhath·ite families of the Levites, because they received the first lot. 11 They gave them Kirʹi·ath-arʹba (Arʹba was the father of Aʹnak), that is, Hebʹron, in the mountainous region of Judah, and its surrounding pastures. 12 But the field of the city and its settlements they gave to Caʹleb the son of Je·phunʹneh as his possession.13 And to the sons of Aaron the priest, they gave the city of refuge for the manslayer, namely, Hebʹron with its pastures, also Libʹnah with its pastures, 14 Jatʹtir with its pastures, Esh·te·moʹa with its pastures, 15 Hoʹlon with its pastures, Deʹbir with its pastures, 16 Aʹin with its pastures, Jutʹtah with its pastures, and Beth-sheʹmesh with its pastures—nine cities out of these two tribes.17 And from the tribe of Benjamin: Gibʹe·on with its pastures, Geʹba with its pastures, 18 Anʹa·thoth with its pastures, and Alʹmon with its pastures—four cities.19 All the cities given to the descendants of Aaron, the priests, were 13 cities with their pastures.20 And the rest of the Koʹhath·ite families among the Levites were given by lot cities from the tribe of Eʹphra·im. 21 They gave them the city of refuge for the manslayer, namely, Sheʹchem with its pastures in the mountainous region of Eʹphra·im, Geʹzer with its pastures, 22 Kibʹza·im with its pastures, and Beth-hoʹron with its pastures—four cities.23 And from the tribe of Dan: Elʹte·ke with its pastures, Gibʹbe·thon with its pastures, 24 Aiʹja·lon with its pastures, Gath-rimʹmon with its pastures—four cities.25 And from the half tribe of Ma·nasʹseh: Taʹa·nach with its pastures and Gath-rimʹmon with its pastures—two cities.26 All the cities together with their pastures that the rest of the families of the Koʹhath·ites received were ten.27 And the Gerʹshon·ites of the families of the Levites received from the half tribe of Ma·nasʹseh the city of refuge for the manslayer, namely, Goʹlan, in Baʹshan, with its pastures and Be·eshʹte·rah with its pastures—two cities.28 And from the tribe of Isʹsa·char: Kishʹi·on with its pastures, Dabʹe·rath with its pastures, 29 Jarʹmuth with its pastures, and En-ganʹnim with its pastures—four cities.30 And from the tribe of Ashʹer: Miʹshal with its pastures, Abʹdon with its pastures, 31 Helʹkath with its pastures, and Reʹhob with its pastures—four cities.32 And from the tribe of Naphʹta·li: the city of refuge for the manslayer, namely, Keʹdesh in Galʹi·lee with its pastures, Hamʹmoth-dor with its pastures, and Karʹtan with its pastures—three cities.33 All the cities of the Gerʹshon·ites by their families were 13 cities with their pastures.34 And the families of the Me·rarʹites, the rest of the Levites, received from the tribe of Zebʹu·lun: Jokʹne·am with its pastures, Karʹtah with its pastures, 35 Dimʹnah with its pastures, and Na·halʹal with its pastures—four cities.36 And from the tribe of Reuʹben: Beʹzer with its pastures, Jaʹhaz with its pastures, 37 Kedʹe·moth with its pastures, and Mephʹa·ath with its pastures—four cities.38 And from the tribe of Gad: the city of refuge for the manslayer, namely, Raʹmoth in Gilʹe·ad with its pastures, Ma·ha·naʹim with its pastures, 39 Heshʹbon with its pastures, and Jaʹzer with its pastures—a total of four cities.40 All the cities that were allotted to the Me·rarʹites by their families, the rest of the families of the Levites, were 12 cities.41 All the cities of the Levites within the possession of the Israelites were 48 cities together with their pastures. 42 Each of these cities had its pastures all around it—this was the case for all these cities.43 So Jehovah gave Israel all the land that he had sworn to give to their forefathers, and they took possession of it and settled in it. 44 Furthermore, Jehovah gave them rest on every side, just as he had sworn to their forefathers, and not one of all their enemies could stand against them. Jehovah gave all their enemies into their hand. 45 Not a promise failed out of all the good promises that Jehovah had made to the house of Israel; all of them came true.
22 Then Joshua summoned the Reuʹben·ites, the Gadʹites, and the half tribe of Ma·nasʹseh 2 and said to them: “You have done all that Moses the servant of Jehovah commanded you, and you have obeyed my voice in all that I commanded you. 3 You have not forsaken your brothers all this time, down to this day; and you have kept the obligation of the commandment of Jehovah your God. 4 Now Jehovah your God has given your brothers rest, just as he promised them. So now you may return to your tents in the land that Moses the servant of Jehovah gave you to possess on the other side of the Jordan. 5 Only be very careful to carry out the commandment and the Law that Moses the servant of Jehovah gave you, by loving Jehovah your God, by walking in all his ways, by keeping his commandments, by sticking to him, and by serving him with all your heart and with all your soul.”6 Then Joshua blessed them and sent them away, and they went to their tents. 7 And to the half tribe of Ma·nasʹseh, Moses had given an inheritance in Baʹshan, and to the other half of the tribe, Joshua gave land on the west side of the Jordan, along with their brothers. Moreover, when Joshua sent them away to their tents, he blessed them 8 and said to them: “Return to your tents with many riches, with very much livestock, with silver and gold, copper and iron, and garments in very great quantity. Take your share of the spoil of your enemies, along with your brothers.”9 After that the Reuʹben·ites, the Gadʹites, and the half tribe of Ma·nasʹseh departed from the other Israelites, from Shiʹloh in the land of Caʹnaan, and they returned to the land of Gilʹe·ad, the land of their possession where they had settled at the order of Jehovah through Moses. 10 When they came to the regions of the Jordan in the land of Caʹnaan, the Reuʹben·ites, the Gadʹites, and the half tribe of Ma·nasʹseh built an altar there by the Jordan, a large, impressive altar. 11 Later the other Israelites heard about it and said: “Look! The Reuʹben·ites, the Gadʹites, and the half tribe of Ma·nasʹseh have built an altar on the frontier of the land of Caʹnaan in the regions of the Jordan on the side belonging to the Israelites.” 12 When the Israelites heard about it, the whole assembly of the Israelites congregated at Shiʹloh to go to war against them.13 Then the Israelites sent Phinʹe·has the son of El·e·aʹzar the priest to the Reuʹben·ites, the Gadʹites, and the half tribe of Ma·nasʹseh in the land of Gilʹe·ad, 14 and ten chieftains were with him, one chieftain of each paternal house of all the tribes of Israel, each a head of his paternal house among the thousands of Israel. 15 When they came to the Reuʹben·ites, the Gadʹites, and the half tribe of Ma·nasʹseh in the land of Gilʹe·ad, they said to them:16 “This is what all the assembly of Jehovah says: ‘What is this act of unfaithfulness that you have committed against the God of Israel? You have turned back today from following Jehovah by building yourselves an altar and rebelling against Jehovah. 17 Was the error of Peʹor not enough for us? We have not cleansed ourselves from it down to this day, even though a plague came upon the assembly of Jehovah. 18 And you would turn back today from following Jehovah! If you rebel today against Jehovah, then tomorrow he will be indignant against the entire assembly of Israel. 19 Now if it is because the land of your possession is unclean, cross over to the land of Jehovah’s possession where the tabernacle of Jehovah resides and settle among us, but do not rebel against Jehovah, and do not make us rebels by building yourselves an altar in addition to the altar of Jehovah our God. 20 When Aʹchan the son of Zeʹrah committed an act of unfaithfulness regarding what was devoted to destruction, did not indignation come against all the assembly of Israel? And he was not the only man to die for his error.’”21 At this the Reuʹben·ites, the Gadʹites, and the half tribe of Ma·nasʹseh said in answer to the heads of the thousands of Israel: 22 “The God of gods, Jehovah! The God of gods, Jehovah! He knows, and Israel will also know. If we were rebellious and unfaithful to Jehovah, do not spare us this day. 23 If we built ourselves an altar to turn back from following Jehovah and to offer burnt offerings, grain offerings, and communion sacrifices on it, Jehovah will exact the penalty. 24 No, it was because of another concern that we did this, for we said, ‘In the future, your sons will say to our sons: “What do you have to do with Jehovah the God of Israel? 25 Jehovah has put the Jordan as a boundary between us and you, the Reuʹben·ites and the Gadʹites. You have no share in Jehovah.” And your sons will hinder our sons from worshipping Jehovah.’26 “So we said, ‘Let us by all means take action by building an altar, not for burnt offerings or sacrifices, 27 but to be a witness between you and us and our descendants after us that we will carry out our service to Jehovah before him with our burnt offerings and our sacrifices and our communion sacrifices, so that your sons may not say to our sons in the future: “You have no share in Jehovah.”’ 28 So we said, ‘If they should say that to us and to our descendants in the future, we will then say: “See the replica of Jehovah’s altar that our forefathers made, not for burnt offerings or sacrifices, but to be a witness between you and us.”’ 29 It is unthinkable for us to rebel against Jehovah and to turn back today from following Jehovah by building an altar for burnt offerings, grain offerings, and sacrifices, other than the altar of Jehovah our God that is before his tabernacle!”30 When Phinʹe·has the priest, the chieftains of the assembly, and the heads of the thousands of Israel who were with him heard the words that the descendants of Reuʹben, Gad, and Ma·nasʹseh spoke, they were satisfied. 31 So Phinʹe·has the son of El·e·aʹzar the priest said to the descendants of Reuʹben, Gad, and Ma·nasʹseh: “Today we know that Jehovah is among us, because you have not committed this act of unfaithfulness against Jehovah. Now you have saved the Israelites out of the hand of Jehovah.”32 Then Phinʹe·has the son of El·e·aʹzar the priest and the chieftains returned from the Reuʹben·ites and the Gadʹites in the land of Gilʹe·ad to the land of Caʹnaan, and they brought back word to the other Israelites. 33 And the Israelites were satisfied with the report. The Israelites then praised God, and they said nothing more about going to war against the Reuʹben·ites and the Gadʹites to destroy the land in which they were dwelling.34 So the Reuʹben·ites and the Gadʹites named the altar, because “it is a witness between us that Jehovah is the true God.”
23 Many days after Jehovah had given Israel rest from all its surrounding enemies, when Joshua was old and advanced in years, 2 Joshua summoned all Israel, its elders, its heads, its judges, and its officers, and he said to them: “I have grown old; I am advanced in years. 3 And you have seen for yourselves all that Jehovah your God did to all these nations in your behalf because Jehovah your God was the one who was fighting for you. 4 See, I assigned to you by lot the land of the nations that remain as an inheritance for your tribes, as well as that of all the nations that I destroyed, from the Jordan to the Great Sea on the west. 5 And Jehovah your God was the one who kept thrusting them away from before you, and he drove them out for you, and you took possession of their land, just as Jehovah your God promised you.6 “Now you must be very courageous to observe and carry out all that is written in the book of the Law of Moses by never deviating from it to the right or to the left, 7 by never mingling with these nations that remain with you. You must not even mention the names of their gods nor swear by them, and you must never serve them nor bow down to them. 8 But you must stick to Jehovah your God, just as you have done down to this day. 9 Jehovah will drive away great and mighty nations from before you, for not a man has been able to stand before you to this day. 10 Just one man of you will chase a thousand, because Jehovah your God is fighting for you, just as he promised you. 11 So be on guard constantly by loving Jehovah your God.12 “But if you should turn back at all and stick to what is left of these nations that remain with you and you form marriage alliances with them and associate with them and they with you, 13 you should know for sure that Jehovah your God will not continue to drive out these nations for you. They will become a trap and a snare and a scourge on your flanks and thorns in your eyes until you have perished from this good land that Jehovah your God has given you.14 “Now look! I am about to die, and you well know with all your heart and with all your soul that not one word out of all the good promises that Jehovah your God has spoken to you has failed. They have all come true for you. Not one word of them has failed. 15 But just as all the good promises that Jehovah your God has spoken to you have come upon you, so Jehovah will bring upon you all the calamity that he promised and will annihilate you from this good land that Jehovah your God has given you. 16 If you violate the covenant of Jehovah your God that he commanded you to keep and if you go and serve other gods and bow down to them, then Jehovah’s anger will blaze against you and you will quickly perish from the good land that he has given you.”
24 Joshua then assembled all the tribes of Israel together at Sheʹchem and summoned the elders of Israel, its heads, its judges, and its officers, and they stood before the true God. 2 Joshua said to all the people: “This is what Jehovah the God of Israel says, ‘It was on the other side of the River that your forefathers lived a long time ago—Teʹrah the father of Abraham and the father of Naʹhor—and they used to serve other gods.3 “‘In time I took your forefather Abraham from the other side of the River and had him walk through all the land of Caʹnaan and made his offspring many. I gave him Isaac; 4 then to Isaac I gave Jacob and Eʹsau. Later to Eʹsau I gave Mount Seʹir as his possession; and Jacob and his sons went down to Egypt. 5 I later sent Moses and Aaron, and I plagued Egypt with what I did among them, and then I brought you out. 6 When I was bringing your fathers out of Egypt and you came to the sea, the Egyptians were chasing after your fathers with war chariots and cavalrymen as far as the Red Sea. 7 They began to cry out to Jehovah, so he placed a darkness between you and the Egyptians and brought the sea over them and covered them, and your own eyes saw what I did in Egypt. Then you dwelled in the wilderness many years.8 “‘And I brought you to the land of the Amʹor·ites who were dwelling on the other side of the Jordan, and they fought against you. But I gave them into your hand so that you could take possession of their land, and I annihilated them from before you. 9 Then Baʹlak son of Zipʹpor, the king of Moʹab, rose up and fought against Israel. So he summoned Baʹlaam the son of Beʹor to curse you. 10 But I would not listen to Baʹlaam. So he blessed you repeatedly, and I rescued you from his hand.11 “‘Then you crossed the Jordan and came to Jerʹi·cho. And the leaders of Jerʹi·cho, the Amʹor·ites, the Perʹiz·zites, the Caʹnaan·ites, the Hitʹtites, the Girʹga·shites, the Hiʹvites, and the Jebʹu·sites fought against you, but I gave them into your hand. 12 So I sent the feeling of dejection ahead of you, and it drove them out from before you—two kings of the Amʹor·ites. It was not by your sword and not by your bow. 13 Thus I gave you a land for which you had not toiled and cities that you had not built, and you settled in them. You are eating from vineyards and olive groves that you did not plant.’14 “Therefore, fear Jehovah and serve him with integrity and faithfulness, and remove the gods that your forefathers served on the other side of the River and in Egypt, and serve Jehovah. 15 Now if it seems bad to you to serve Jehovah, choose for yourselves today whom you will serve, whether the gods that your forefathers served on the other side of the River or the gods of the Amʹor·ites in whose land you are dwelling. But as for me and my household, we will serve Jehovah.”16 At this the people answered: “It is unthinkable for us to abandon Jehovah and to serve other gods. 17 It is Jehovah our God who brought us and our fathers up out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of slavery, and who performed these great signs before our eyes and who kept guarding us the entire way in which we walked and among all the peoples through whom we passed. 18 Jehovah drove out all the peoples, including the Amʹor·ites, who lived in the land before us. Therefore, we too will serve Jehovah, because he is our God.”19 Then Joshua said to the people: “You are not able to serve Jehovah, for he is a holy God; he is a God who requires exclusive devotion. He will not pardon your transgressions and your sins. 20 If you abandon Jehovah and serve foreign gods, he will also turn against you and exterminate you after doing good for you.”21 But the people said to Joshua: “No, but we will serve Jehovah!” 22 So Joshua said to the people: “You are witnesses against yourselves that of your own accord, you have chosen for yourselves to serve Jehovah.” To this they said: “We are witnesses.”23 “Therefore, remove the foreign gods that are among you, and incline your hearts to Jehovah the God of Israel.” 24 The people said to Joshua: “We will serve Jehovah our God, and we will obey his voice!”25 So Joshua made a covenant with the people on that day and established a regulation and a ruling for them in Sheʹchem. 26 Then Joshua wrote these words in the book of God’s Law and took a great stone and set it up under the large tree that is by the sanctuary of Jehovah.27 Joshua went on to say to all the people: “Look! This stone will serve as a witness against us, because it has heard everything Jehovah said to us, and it will serve as a witness against you, so that you may not deny your God.” 28 With that Joshua sent the people away, each one to his inheritance.29 After these things, Joshua the son of Nun, the servant of Jehovah, died at the age of 110. 30 So they buried him in the territory of his inheritance in Timʹnath-seʹrah, which is in the mountainous region of Eʹphra·im, north of Mount Gaʹash. 31 Israel continued to serve Jehovah all the days of Joshua and all the days of the elders who outlived Joshua and who had known all of Jehovah’s deeds in behalf of Israel.32 The bones of Joseph, which the Israelites had brought up out of Egypt, were buried in Sheʹchem in the portion of the field that Jacob had acquired from the sons of Haʹmor, Sheʹchem’s father, for 100 pieces of money; and it became the inheritance of the sons of Joseph.33 Also, El·e·aʹzar the son of Aaron died. So they buried him in the Hill of Phinʹe·has his son, which had been given to him in the mountainous region of Eʹphra·im.
3 Then Joshua got up early in the morning, and he and all the Israelites departed from Shitʹtim and came to the Jordan. They spent the night there before crossing over.2 After three days, the officers passed throughout the camp 3 and commanded the people: “As soon as you see the ark of the covenant of Jehovah your God being carried by the Levitical priests, you should depart from your place and follow it. 4 But keep a distance of about 2,000 cubits from it; do not come any nearer to it, so that you may know which is the way to go, for you have not traveled on this way before.”5 Joshua now said to the people: “Sanctify yourselves, for tomorrow Jehovah will do wonderful things among you.”6 Then Joshua said to the priests: “Take up the ark of the covenant and pass ahead of the people.” So they took up the ark of the covenant and went ahead of the people.7 Then Jehovah said to Joshua: “This day I will start to exalt you in the eyes of all Israel, so that they may know that I will be with you just as I was with Moses. 8 You should give this command to the priests carrying the ark of the covenant: ‘When you reach the edge of the waters of the Jordan, you should stand still in the Jordan.’”9 And Joshua said to the Israelites: “Come here and listen to the words of Jehovah your God.” 10 Joshua then said: “By this you will know that a living God is among you, and that he will without fail drive away from before you the Caʹnaan·ites, the Hitʹtites, the Hiʹvites, the Perʹiz·zites, the Girʹga·shites, the Amʹor·ites, and the Jebʹu·sites. 11 Look! The ark of the covenant of the Lord of the whole earth is passing ahead of you into the Jordan. 12 Now take 12 men from the tribes of Israel, one man for each tribe, 13 and as soon as the soles of the feet of the priests carrying the Ark of Jehovah, the Lord of the whole earth, touch the waters of the Jordan, the waters of the Jordan flowing from upstream will be halted and they will stand still like a dam.”14 So when the people departed from their tents just before crossing the Jordan, the priests carrying the ark of the covenant went ahead of the people. 15 As soon as the carriers of the Ark reached the Jordan and the priests carrying the Ark dipped their feet into the edge of the waters (now the Jordan overflows its banks all the days of harvest), 16 the waters flowing from upstream stood still. They rose up like a dam very far away at Adam, the city near Zarʹe·than, while the waters descending toward the Sea of the Arʹa·bah, the Salt Sea, drained away. They were halted, and the people crossed over opposite Jerʹi·cho. 17 While the priests carrying the ark of Jehovah’s covenant kept standing still on dry ground in the middle of the Jordan, all Israel crossed over on dry ground until the whole nation had finished crossing the Jordan.
4 As soon as the whole nation had finished crossing the Jordan, Jehovah said to Joshua: 2 “Take 12 men from the people, one man from each tribe, 3 and give them this command: ‘Take up 12 stones from the middle of the Jordan, from the place where the priests’ feet stood still, and carry them over with you and set them down in the place where you will spend the night.’”4 So Joshua called the 12 men whom he had appointed from the Israelites, one man from each tribe, 5 and Joshua said to them: “Pass ahead of the Ark of Jehovah your God to the middle of the Jordan, and each of you should lift up a stone on his shoulder, according to the number of the tribes of the Israelites, 6 to serve as a sign among you. If your children should later ask you, ‘Why do you have these stones?’ 7 you must tell them: ‘Because the waters of the Jordan were halted from before the ark of Jehovah’s covenant. When it crossed the Jordan, the waters of the Jordan were halted. These stones will serve as a lasting memorial to the people of Israel.’”8 So the Israelites did just as Joshua had commanded. They took up 12 stones from the middle of the Jordan, just as Jehovah had instructed Joshua, to correspond to the number of the tribes of the Israelites. They took them over to the place where they would spend the night and set them down there.9 Joshua also set up 12 stones in the middle of the Jordan at the place where the feet of the priests who carried the ark of the covenant stood, and the stones are there to this day.10 The priests carrying the Ark remained standing in the middle of the Jordan until everything that Jehovah had ordered Joshua to tell the people to do was completed, in harmony with all that Moses had commanded Joshua. All the while, the people hurried across. 11 As soon as all the people had finished crossing over, the Ark of Jehovah and the priests crossed over in the sight of the people. 12 And the Reuʹben·ites, the Gadʹites, and the half tribe of Ma·nasʹseh crossed over in battle formation ahead of the other Israelites, just as Moses had instructed them. 13 About 40,000 soldiers armed for battle crossed over before Jehovah onto the desert plains of Jerʹi·cho.14 On that day Jehovah exalted Joshua in the eyes of all Israel, and they deeply respected him all the days of his life, just as they had deeply respected Moses.15 Then Jehovah said to Joshua: 16 “Command the priests carrying the ark of the Testimony to come up out of the Jordan.” 17 So Joshua commanded the priests: “Come up out of the Jordan.” 18 When the priests carrying the ark of the covenant of Jehovah came up from the middle of the Jordan and the soles of the feet of the priests stepped onto dry ground, the waters of the Jordan resumed their course and overflowed the banks as before.19 The people came up from the Jordan on the tenth day of the first month and camped at Gilʹgal on the eastern border of Jerʹi·cho.20 As for the 12 stones that they had taken out of the Jordan, Joshua set these up at Gilʹgal. 21 Then he said to the Israelites: “In the future when your children ask their fathers, ‘What do these stones mean?’ 22 you must explain to your children: ‘Israel crossed the Jordan on dry land 23 when Jehovah your God dried up the waters of the Jordan before them until they had crossed it, just as Jehovah your God did to the Red Sea when he dried it up before us until we crossed it. 24 He did this so that all the peoples of the earth may know how mighty Jehovah’s hand is and so that you may always fear Jehovah your God.’”
5 As soon as all the kings of the Amʹor·ites who were on the west side of the Jordan and all the kings of the Caʹnaan·ites who were by the sea heard that Jehovah had dried up the waters of the Jordan before the Israelites until they had crossed over, they lost heart, and they lost all courage because of the Israelites.2 At that time Jehovah said to Joshua: “Make for yourself flint knives and circumcise the men of Israel again, a second time.” 3 So Joshua made flint knives and circumcised the men of Israel at Gibʹe·ath-ha·arʹa·loth. 4 This is why Joshua circumcised them: All the males of the people who left Egypt, all the men of war, had died in the wilderness on the journey after they left Egypt. 5 All the people who left Egypt were circumcised, but all the people born in the wilderness on the journey after they left Egypt were not circumcised. 6 The Israelites had walked for 40 years in the wilderness until the entire nation had died off, that is, the men of war who left Egypt who did not obey the voice of Jehovah. Jehovah swore to them that he would never let them see the land that Jehovah had sworn to their forefathers to give to us, a land flowing with milk and honey. 7 So he raised up their sons instead of them. These Joshua circumcised; they were uncircumcised because they had not circumcised them during the journey.8 When they finished circumcising the entire nation, they remained where they were in the camp until they recovered.9 Then Jehovah said to Joshua: “Today I have rolled away from you the reproach of Egypt.” So that place has been called Gilʹgal until this day.10 The Israelites continued to camp at Gilʹgal, and they observed the Passover on the 14th day of the month, in the evening, on the desert plains of Jerʹi·cho. 11 And they began to eat the produce of the land the day after the Passover, unleavened bread and roasted grains, on this same day. 12 Then the manna stopped on the day following when they had eaten some of the produce of the land; there was no longer manna for the Israelites, but they began to eat the produce of the land of Caʹnaan in that year.13 When Joshua was near Jerʹi·cho, he looked up and saw a man standing in front of him with a drawn sword in his hand. Joshua walked up to him and asked: “Are you on our side or on the side of our adversaries?” 14 To this he said: “No, but I have come as prince of Jehovah’s army.” With that Joshua fell with his face to the ground and prostrated himself and said to him: “What does my lord have to say to his servant?” 15 The prince of Jehovah’s army replied to Joshua: “Remove your sandals from your feet, because the place where you are standing is holy.” At once Joshua did so.
6 Now Jerʹi·cho was tightly shut up because of the Israelites; no one was leaving and no one was entering.2 Jehovah then said to Joshua: “See, I have handed over to you Jerʹi·cho and its king and its mighty warriors. 3 All you fighting men should march around the city, going around the city once. That is what you should do for six days. 4 Have seven priests carry seven ram’s horns before the Ark. But on the seventh day, you should march around the city seven times and the priests should blow the horns. 5 When the ram’s horn is sounded—as soon as you hear the sound of the horn—all the people should shout a great war cry. Then the wall of the city will fall down flat, and the people must go up, each one straight ahead.”6 So Joshua the son of Nun called the priests together and told them: “Take up the ark of the covenant, and seven priests should carry seven ram’s horns before the Ark of Jehovah.” 7 Then he told the people: “Move on and march around the city, and the armed troops should go ahead of the Ark of Jehovah.” 8 And just as Joshua had spoken to the people, the seven priests carrying seven ram’s horns before Jehovah went forward and blew the horns, and the ark of the covenant of Jehovah was following them. 9 And the armed troops went ahead of the priests who were blowing the horns, and the rear guard followed the Ark as the horns were blown continuously.10 Now Joshua had commanded the people: “Do not shout nor let your voices be heard. Not a word should come out of your mouths until the day I say to you, ‘Shout!’ Then shout.” 11 He had the Ark of Jehovah go around the city, going around it once, after which they returned to the camp and spent the night there.12 The next morning Joshua got up early, and the priests took up the Ark of Jehovah, 13 and seven priests carrying seven ram’s horns walked before the Ark of Jehovah, continuously blowing the horns. The armed troops were walking ahead of them while the rear guard was following the Ark of Jehovah as the horns were blown continuously. 14 They marched around the city on the second day once, after which they returned to the camp. That was what they did for six days.15 On the seventh day they got up early, as soon as the dawn broke, and they marched around the city in the same manner seven times. It was only on that day that they marched around the city seven times. 16 And on the seventh time, the priests blew the horns, and Joshua told the people: “Shout, for Jehovah has given you the city! 17 The city and everything in it is to be devoted to destruction; it all belongs to Jehovah. Only Raʹhab the prostitute may keep living, she and all who are with her in the house, because she hid the messengers we sent out. 18 But keep away from what is devoted to destruction, so that you do not desire something devoted to destruction and take it, making the camp of Israel something devoted to destruction by bringing disaster on it. 19 But all the silver and the gold and the articles of copper and iron are holy to Jehovah. They should go into the treasury of Jehovah.”20 Then the people shouted when the horns were blown. As soon as the people heard the sound of the horn and shouted a great war cry, the wall fell down flat. After that the people went up into the city, each one straight ahead, and they captured the city. 21 They devoted all that was in the city to destruction by the sword, man and woman, young and old, bull, sheep, and donkey.22 Joshua said to the two men who had spied out the land: “Go into the house of the prostitute and bring out the woman and all who belong to her, just as you swore to her.” 23 So the young spies went in and brought out Raʹhab, along with her father, her mother, her brothers, and all who belonged to her; yes, they brought out her whole family, and they brought them safely to a place outside the camp of Israel.24 Then they burned the city and everything in it with fire. But the silver, the gold, and the articles of copper and iron, they gave to the treasury of Jehovah’s house. 25 Only Raʹhab the prostitute and her father’s household and all who belonged to her were spared by Joshua; and she lives in Israel to this day, because she hid the messengers whom Joshua sent out to spy on Jerʹi·cho.26 At that time Joshua pronounced this oath: “Cursed be the man before Jehovah who undertakes to rebuild this city of Jerʹi·cho. At the cost of his firstborn he will lay its foundation, and at the cost of his youngest he will put up its doors.”27 So Jehovah was with Joshua, and his fame spread through all the earth.
7 But the Israelites were unfaithful with regard to what had been devoted to destruction, for Aʹchan son of Carʹmi, son of Zabʹdi, son of Zeʹrah, of the tribe of Judah, took some of what was devoted to destruction. At this Jehovah’s anger blazed against the Israelites.2 Then Joshua sent men out from Jerʹi·cho to Aʹi, which is close by Beth-aʹven and east of Bethʹel, telling them: “Go up and spy on the land.” So the men went up and spied on Aʹi. 3 When they returned to Joshua, they told him: “Not all the people need to go up. About two or three thousand men are enough to defeat Aʹi. Do not tire out all the people by making them go, for there are only a few of them.”4 So about 3,000 men went up there, but they had to flee from the men of Aʹi. 5 The men of Aʹi struck down 36 men, and they pursued them from outside the city gate as far as Shebʹa·rim, and they continued striking them down on the descent. So the courage of the people melted and flowed away like water.6 At this Joshua ripped his garments and fell with his face to the ground before the Ark of Jehovah until the evening, he and the elders of Israel, and they kept throwing dust on their heads. 7 Joshua said: “Alas, Sovereign Lord Jehovah, why did you bring this people all the way across the Jordan just to hand us over to the Amʹor·ites to be destroyed? If only we had been satisfied to remain on the other side of the Jordan! 8 Pardon me, O Jehovah, what can I say now that Israel has retreated before his enemies? 9 When the Caʹnaan·ites and all the inhabitants of the land hear about it, they will surround us and wipe out our very name from the earth, and what will you do about your great name?”10 Jehovah replied to Joshua: “Get up! Why are you lying on your face? 11 Israel has sinned. They have violated my covenant that I commanded them to keep. They took some of what was devoted to destruction, stealing it and secretly putting it among their own possessions. 12 Therefore, the Israelites will not be able to stand against their enemies. They will turn their backs and flee from their enemies, because they have become something devoted to destruction. I will not be with you again unless you annihilate from your midst what was devoted to destruction. 13 Get up and sanctify the people! Tell them, ‘Sanctify yourselves tomorrow, for this is what Jehovah the God of Israel says: “What is devoted to destruction is among you, O Israel. You will not be able to stand against your enemies until you remove from your midst the thing devoted to destruction. 14 You are to present yourselves in the morning, tribe by tribe, and the tribe that Jehovah selects will come near, family by family, and the family that Jehovah selects will come near, household by household, and the household that Jehovah selects will come near, man by man. 15 And the one who is caught with the thing devoted to destruction will be burned with fire, he and all that belongs to him, because he has violated the covenant of Jehovah and because he has committed a disgraceful act in Israel.”’”16 So Joshua rose early the next morning and had Israel come near, tribe by tribe, and the tribe of Judah was selected. 17 He had the families of Judah come near and the family of the Zeʹrah·ites was selected, after which he had the family of the Zeʹrah·ites come near, man by man, and Zabʹdi was selected. 18 Finally he had the household of Zabʹdi come near, man by man, and Aʹchan son of Carʹmi, son of Zabʹdi, son of Zeʹrah, of the tribe of Judah, was selected. 19 Then Joshua said to Aʹchan: “My son, please, honor Jehovah the God of Israel and make confession to him. Tell me, please, what you have done. Do not hide it from me.”20 Aʹchan answered Joshua: “For a fact I am the one who sinned against Jehovah the God of Israel, and this is what I have done. 21 When I saw among the spoil a good-looking official garment from Shiʹnar and 200 shekels of silver and one gold bar weighing 50 shekels, I desired them, so I took them. They are now hidden in the ground inside my tent, with the money underneath.”22 At once Joshua sent messengers, and they ran to the tent, and there the garment was hidden in his tent, with the money underneath it. 23 So they took the things out of the tent and brought them to Joshua and all the Israelites and placed them before Jehovah. 24 Joshua and all Israel with him then took Aʹchan the son of Zeʹrah, the silver, the official garment, and the bar of gold, along with his sons, his daughters, his bull, his donkey, his flock, his tent, and everything that was his, and they brought them up to the Valley of Aʹchor. 25 Joshua said: “Why have you brought disaster upon us? Jehovah will bring disaster upon you on this day.” With that all Israel stoned him, after which they burned them with fire. Thus they stoned all of them. 26 And they raised a huge pile of stones over him that remains to this day. At this Jehovah’s hot anger subsided. That is why the name of that place is Valley of Aʹchor to this day.
8 Then Jehovah said to Joshua: “Do not be afraid or be terrified. Take with you all the fighting men and go up against Aʹi. See, I have handed over to you the king of Aʹi, his people, his city, and his land. 2 Do to Aʹi and to its king just as you did to Jerʹi·cho and its king, except you may plunder its spoil and its livestock for yourselves. Set an ambush behind the city.”3 So Joshua and all the fighting men went up against Aʹi. Joshua chose 30,000 mighty warriors and sent them off by night. 4 He gave them this command: “See, you are to lie in ambush behind the city. Do not go very far from the city, and all of you be ready. 5 I and all the people with me will approach the city, and when they come out against us as before, we will retreat from them. 6 When they come out after us, we will draw them away from the city, for they will say, ‘They are retreating from us just as before.’ And we will retreat from them. 7 Then you should rise up from the ambush and capture the city; Jehovah your God will hand it over to you. 8 As soon as you have seized the city, you should set it on fire. You should do according to Jehovah’s word. See, I have given you your orders.”9 Then Joshua sent them out, and they marched to the place of ambush; they took a position between Bethʹel and Aʹi, to the west of Aʹi, while Joshua spent that night with the people.10 After Joshua rose up early in the morning and gathered the troops, he and the elders of Israel led them to Aʹi. 11 All the fighting men who were with him marched up and advanced to the front of the city. They camped to the north of Aʹi, with the valley between them and Aʹi. 12 In the meantime, he had taken about 5,000 men and had set them as an ambush between Bethʹel and Aʹi, to the west of the city. 13 So the people set the main camp to the north of the city and the rear guard west of the city, and Joshua went that night into the middle of the valley.14 And as soon as the king of Aʹi saw this, he and the men of the city hurried out early in the morning to meet Israel in battle at a certain place overlooking the desert plain. But he did not know that there was an ambush set against him to the rear of the city. 15 When the men of Aʹi attacked, Joshua and all Israel fled along the road in the direction of the wilderness. 16 Then all the people who were in the city were summoned to pursue them; and as they pursued Joshua they were drawn away from the city. 17 Not a man was remaining in Aʹi and Bethʹel who did not go out after Israel. They left the city wide open and pursued Israel.18 Jehovah now said to Joshua: “Stretch out the javelin that is in your hand toward Aʹi, for into your hand I will give it.” So Joshua stretched out the javelin that was in his hand toward the city. 19 The moment he stretched out his hand, the ambush rose up quickly from its place and ran into the city and captured it. They immediately set the city on fire.20 When the men of Aʹi turned around, they saw the smoke of the city rising to the sky, and they had no strength to flee in any direction. Then the people who had been fleeing toward the wilderness turned on their pursuers. 21 When Joshua and all Israel saw that the ambush had captured the city and saw the smoke of the city rising, they turned around and attacked the men of Aʹi. 22 And the others came out of the city to meet them, so that the men of Aʹi were trapped in the middle, with some Israelites on this side and some on that side, and they struck them down until there was not one survivor or escapee remaining. 23 But they caught the king of Aʹi alive and brought him before Joshua.24 After Israel finished killing all the inhabitants of Aʹi in the field, in the wilderness where they had pursued them, and every last one of them had fallen by the sword, then all Israel returned to Aʹi and struck it with the sword. 25 All those who fell on that day, from man to woman, amounted to 12,000, all the people of Aʹi. 26 Joshua did not draw back his hand with which he had stretched out the javelin until he had devoted all the inhabitants of Aʹi to destruction. 27 However, Israel took the livestock and the spoil of that city for themselves, according to the orders that Jehovah had given to Joshua.28 Then Joshua burned Aʹi and reduced it to a permanent mound of ruins, as it remains to this day. 29 He hung the king of Aʹi on a stake until the evening, and as the sun was about to set, Joshua gave the order to take his dead body down from the stake. Then they pitched it at the entrance of the city gate and raised up a great pile of stones over him, which is there to this day.30 It was then that Joshua built an altar on Mount Eʹbal to Jehovah the God of Israel, 31 just as Moses the servant of Jehovah had commanded the Israelites and as it is written in the book of the Law of Moses: “An altar of whole stones on which no iron tool has been wielded.” On it they offered up burnt offerings to Jehovah as well as communion sacrifices.32 Then he wrote there on the stones a copy of the Law that Moses had written before the Israelites. 33 All Israel, their elders, the officers, and their judges were standing on both sides of the Ark in front of the Levitical priests who were carrying the ark of the covenant of Jehovah. The foreign residents were there as well as the natives. Half of them stood in front of Mount Gerʹi·zim, and the other half in front of Mount Eʹbal (just as Moses the servant of Jehovah had previously commanded), to bless the people of Israel. 34 After this he read aloud all the words of the Law, the blessings and the curses, according to all that is written in the book of the Law. 35 There was not a word of all that Moses had commanded that Joshua did not read aloud in front of all the congregation of Israel, including the women and children and the foreign residents who were living among them.
9 When all the kings who were on the west side of the Jordan heard what had happened, those in the mountainous region, in the She·pheʹlah, along the entire coast of the Great Sea, and in front of Lebʹa·non—the Hitʹtites, the Amʹor·ites, the Caʹnaan·ites, the Perʹiz·zites, the Hiʹvites, and the Jebʹu·sites— 2 they formed an alliance to fight against Joshua and Israel.3 The inhabitants of Gibʹe·on also heard what Joshua had done to Jerʹi·cho and Aʹi. 4 So they acted shrewdly and put provisions into worn-out sacks on their donkeys, along with worn-out wineskins that had burst and had been mended; 5 they also had worn-out and patched sandals on their feet, and they were wearing worn-out garments. All the bread of their provisions was dry and crumbly. 6 Then they went to Joshua at the camp at Gilʹgal and said to him and the men of Israel: “We have come from a distant land. Now make a covenant with us.” 7 But the men of Israel said to the Hiʹvites: “Perhaps you are living near us. So how can we make a covenant with you?” 8 They replied to Joshua: “We are your servants.”Then Joshua said to them: “Who are you, and where do you come from?” 9 At this they said to him: “Your servants have come from a very distant land out of regard for the name of Jehovah your God, because we have heard about his fame and about all he did in Egypt 10 and about all he did to the two kings of the Amʹor·ites who were on the other side of the Jordan, King Siʹhon of Heshʹbon and King Og of Baʹshan, who was in Ashʹta·roth. 11 So our elders and all the inhabitants of our land told us, ‘Take provisions with you for the journey and go to meet them. Tell them: “We will be your servants; now make a covenant with us.”’ 12 This bread that we took as our provisions was still hot on the day we left our houses to come here to you. Now you can see it is dry and crumbly. 13 And these wineskins were new when we filled them, but now they have burst. And our garments and sandals have worn out because of the great length of the journey.”14 At that the men took some of their provisions, but they did not inquire of Jehovah. 15 So Joshua made peace with them and made a covenant with them to let them live, and that is what the chieftains of the assembly swore to them in an oath.16 At the end of three days, after they made a covenant with them, they heard that they lived nearby, in their vicinity. 17 Then the Israelites set out and came to their cities on the third day; their cities were Gibʹe·on, Che·phiʹrah, Be·erʹoth, and Kirʹi·ath-jeʹa·rim. 18 But the Israelites did not attack them, because the chieftains of the assembly had sworn an oath to them by Jehovah the God of Israel. So all the assembly began to murmur against the chieftains. 19 At this all the chieftains said to the entire assembly: “Since we swore an oath to them by Jehovah the God of Israel, we are not allowed to hurt them. 20 This is what we will do: We will let them live, so that there is no indignation against us because of the oath that we swore to them.” 21 And the chieftains added: “Let them live, but let them become gatherers of wood and drawers of water for all the assembly.” This is what the chieftains promised them.22 Joshua now called them and said to them: “Why did you trick us by saying, ‘We are from a place very far away from you,’ when you really live right among us? 23 From now on you are cursed, and you will always occupy a slave’s position as gatherers of wood and drawers of water for the house of my God.” 24 They answered Joshua: “It was because your servants were plainly told that Jehovah your God had commanded Moses his servant to give you all the land and to annihilate all its inhabitants from before you. So we were afraid for our lives because of you, and that is why we did this. 25 Now we are at your mercy. Do to us whatever you think is good and right.” 26 And that is what he did with them; he saved them from the hands of the Israelites, and they did not kill them. 27 But that day Joshua made them gatherers of wood and drawers of water for the assembly and for Jehovah’s altar at the place that He should choose, and they remain so to this day.
1 After the death of Moses the servant of Jehovah, Jehovah said to Joshua the son of Nun, the minister of Moses: 2 “Moses my servant is dead. Now get up, cross the Jordan, you and all this people, and go into the land that I am giving to them, to the people of Israel. 3 I will give you every place on which you set your foot, just as I promised Moses. 4 Your territory will extend from the wilderness up to Lebʹa·non and to the great river, the Eu·phraʹtes—all the land of the Hitʹtites—and to the Great Sea on the west. 5 No one will be able to take a stand against you as long as you live. Just as I was with Moses, so I will be with you. I will neither desert you nor abandon you. 6 Be courageous and strong, for you are the one who will cause this people to inherit the land that I swore to their forefathers I would give to them.7 “Only be courageous and very strong, and observe carefully the entire Law that Moses my servant commanded you. Do not deviate from it either to the right or to the left, so that you may act wisely wherever you go. 8 This book of the Law should not depart from your mouth, and you must read it in an undertone day and night, in order to observe carefully all that is written in it; for then your way will be successful and then you will act wisely. 9 Have I not commanded you? Be courageous and strong. Do not be struck with terror or fear, for Jehovah your God is with you wherever you go.”10 Then Joshua commanded the officers of the people: 11 “Pass throughout the camp and give this command to the people, ‘Get provisions ready, because in three days you will cross the Jordan to go in and take possession of the land that Jehovah your God is giving you to possess.’”12 And to the Reuʹben·ites, the Gadʹites, and the half tribe of Ma·nasʹseh, Joshua said: 13 “Remember what Moses the servant of Jehovah commanded you: ‘Jehovah your God is giving you rest and has given you this land. 14 Your wives, your children, and your livestock will dwell in the land that Moses has given you on this side of the Jordan, but all you mighty warriors should cross over in battle formation ahead of your brothers. You must help them 15 until Jehovah gives your brothers rest, just as he has given you, and they also take possession of the land that Jehovah your God is giving them. Then return to the land you were given to occupy and take possession of it, the land that Moses the servant of Jehovah gave you on the east side of the Jordan.’”16 They answered Joshua: “We will do all that you have commanded, and we will go wherever you send us. 17 Just as we listened to everything Moses said, so we will listen to you. Only may Jehovah your God be with you just as he was with Moses. 18 Any man who rebels against your order and does not obey every command you give him will be put to death. Only be courageous and strong.”
10 After A·bimʹe·lech, Toʹla the son of Puʹah, the son of Doʹdo, a man of Isʹsa·char, rose up to save Israel. He lived in Shaʹmir in the mountainous region of Eʹphra·im. 2 He judged Israel for 23 years. Then he died and was buried in Shaʹmir.3 After him Jaʹir the Gilʹe·ad·ite rose up and judged Israel for 22 years. 4 He had 30 sons who rode on 30 donkeys, and they had 30 cities, which to this day are called Havʹvoth-jaʹir; they are in the land of Gilʹe·ad. 5 After that Jaʹir died and was buried in Kaʹmon.6 Again the Israelites did what was bad in the eyes of Jehovah, and they began to serve the Baʹals, the Ashʹto·reth images, the gods of Aʹram, the gods of Siʹdon, the gods of Moʹab, the gods of the Amʹmon·ites, and the gods of the Phi·lisʹtines. They abandoned Jehovah and did not serve him. 7 Then Jehovah’s anger blazed against Israel, and he sold them into the hands of the Phi·lisʹtines and the Amʹmon·ites. 8 So they crushed and greatly oppressed the Israelites in that year—for 18 years they oppressed all the Israelites on the side of the Jordan that had been the land of the Amʹor·ites in Gilʹe·ad. 9 The Amʹmon·ites would also cross the Jordan to fight against Judah and Benjamin and the house of Eʹphra·im; and Israel was greatly distressed. 10 Then the Israelites called to Jehovah for help, saying: “We have sinned against you, for we abandoned our God and served the Baʹals.”11 But Jehovah said to the Israelites: “Did I not save you from Egypt and from the Amʹor·ites, the Amʹmon·ites, the Phi·lisʹtines, 12 the Si·doʹni·ans, Amʹa·lek, and Midʹi·an when they oppressed you? When you cried out to me, I saved you out of their hand. 13 But you abandoned me and served other gods. That is why I will not save you again. 14 Go to the gods whom you have chosen and call for help. Let them save you in your time of distress.” 15 But the Israelites said to Jehovah: “We have sinned. Do to us whatever is good in your eyes. Only save us, please, this day.” 16 And they removed the foreign gods from their midst and served Jehovah, so that he could no longer tolerate Israel’s suffering.17 In time the Amʹmon·ites were called together, and they pitched camp in Gilʹe·ad. So the Israelites gathered together and pitched camp in Mizʹpah. 18 The people and the princes of Gilʹe·ad said to one another: “Who will take the lead in fighting against the Amʹmon·ites? Let him become the chief over all the inhabitants of Gilʹe·ad.”
11 Now Jephʹthah the Gilʹe·ad·ite was a mighty warrior; he was the son of a prostitute, and Gilʹe·ad was Jephʹthah’s father. 2 But Gilʹe·ad’s wife also bore him sons. When the sons of his wife grew up, they drove Jephʹthah out and said to him: “You will have no inheritance in our father’s household, for you are the son of another woman.” 3 So Jephʹthah fled from his brothers and settled in the land of Tob. And idle men joined company with Jephʹthah, and they followed him.4 After a while, the Amʹmon·ites fought against Israel. 5 And when the Amʹmon·ites fought against Israel, the elders of Gilʹe·ad immediately went to bring Jephʹthah back from the land of Tob. 6 They said to Jephʹthah: “Come and serve as our commander, so that we can fight against the Amʹmon·ites.” 7 But Jephʹthah said to the elders of Gilʹe·ad: “Was it not you who hated me so much that you drove me out of my father’s house? Why have you come to me now when you are in distress?” 8 At this the elders of Gilʹe·ad said to Jephʹthah: “That is why now we have returned to you. If you go with us and fight against the Amʹmon·ites, you will become our leader over all the inhabitants of Gilʹe·ad.” 9 So Jephʹthah said to the elders of Gilʹe·ad: “If you bring me back to fight against the Amʹmon·ites and Jehovah defeats them for me, then I will indeed become your leader!” 10 The elders of Gilʹe·ad said to Jephʹthah: “Let Jehovah be the witness between us if we do not do as you say.” 11 So Jephʹthah went with the elders of Gilʹe·ad, and the people made him their leader and commander. And Jephʹthah repeated all his words before Jehovah in Mizʹpah.12 Jephʹthah then sent messengers to the king of the Amʹmon·ites, saying: “What do you have against me that you have come to attack my land?” 13 So the king of the Amʹmon·ites said to the messengers of Jephʹthah: “It is because Israel took my land when they came up out of Egypt, from the Arʹnon to the Jabʹbok and as far as the Jordan. Now return it peaceably.” 14 But Jephʹthah sent messengers back to the king of the Amʹmon·ites 15 to say to him:“This is what Jephʹthah says: ‘Israel did not take the land of the Moʹab·ites and the land of the Amʹmon·ites, 16 for when they came up out of Egypt, Israel walked through the wilderness as far as the Red Sea and came to Kaʹdesh. 17 Then Israel sent messengers to the king of Eʹdom, saying: “Please let us pass through your land,” but the king of Eʹdom did not listen. Also to the king of Moʹab they sent word, but he did not consent. So Israel kept dwelling in Kaʹdesh. 18 When they walked through the wilderness, they bypassed the land of Eʹdom and the land of Moʹab. They traveled east of the land of Moʹab and camped in the region of the Arʹnon; they did not come within the boundary of Moʹab, for the Arʹnon was the boundary of Moʹab.19 “‘After that Israel sent messengers to Siʹhon king of the Amʹor·ites, king of Heshʹbon, and Israel said to him: “Please let us pass through your land to our own place.” 20 But Siʹhon did not trust Israel to cross through his territory, so Siʹhon gathered all his people together and encamped in Jaʹhaz and fought against Israel. 21 At this Jehovah the God of Israel gave Siʹhon and all his people into Israel’s hand, so that they defeated them and Israel took possession of all the land of the Amʹor·ites, the inhabitants of that land. 22 Thus they took possession of all the territory of the Amʹor·ites from the Arʹnon to the Jabʹbok and from the wilderness to the Jordan.23 “‘It was Jehovah the God of Israel who drove out the Amʹor·ites from before his people Israel, and now would you drive them out? 24 Do you not possess whatever your god Cheʹmosh gives you to possess? So everyone whom Jehovah our God has driven out from before us is the one we will drive out. 25 Now are you any better than Baʹlak the son of Zipʹpor, the king of Moʹab? Did he ever contend with Israel, or did he ever fight against them? 26 While Israel was dwelling in Heshʹbon and its dependent towns and in A·roʹer and its dependent towns and in all the cities that are by the banks of the Arʹnon for 300 years, why did you never try to take them back during that time? 27 I have not sinned against you, but you are wrong to attack me. Let Jehovah the Judge be judge today between the people of Israel and the people of Amʹmon.’”28 But the king of the Amʹmon·ites would not listen to the message that Jephʹthah sent to him.29 Jehovah’s spirit came upon Jephʹthah, and he passed through Gilʹe·ad and Ma·nasʹseh to go to Mizʹpeh of Gilʹe·ad, and from Mizʹpeh of Gilʹe·ad he continued on to the Amʹmon·ites.30 Then Jephʹthah made a vow to Jehovah and said: “If you give the Amʹmon·ites into my hand, 31 then whoever comes out of the door of my house to meet me when I return in peace from the Amʹmon·ites will become Jehovah’s, and I will offer that one up as a burnt offering.”32 So Jephʹthah went to fight against the Amʹmon·ites, and Jehovah gave them into his hand. 33 He struck them down with a very great slaughter from A·roʹer all the way to Minʹnith—20 cities—and as far as Aʹbel-kerʹa·mim. Thus the Amʹmon·ites were subdued before the Israelites.34 Finally Jephʹthah came to his home in Mizʹpah, and look! his daughter was coming out to meet him, playing the tambourine and dancing! Now she was his one and only child. Besides her, he had neither son nor daughter. 35 When he saw her, he ripped his garments and said: “Oh no, my daughter! You have broken my heart, for you have become the one I have banished. Now I have opened my mouth to Jehovah, and I am unable to turn back.”36 But she said to him: “My father, if you have opened your mouth to Jehovah, do to me as you have promised, since Jehovah has executed vengeance for you upon your enemies, the Amʹmon·ites.” 37 She then said to her father: “Let this be done for me: Let me be alone for two months, and let me go away into the mountains, and let me weep over my virginity with my female companions.”38 At this he said: “Go!” So he sent her away for two months, and she went to the mountains with her companions to weep over her virginity. 39 At the end of two months, she returned to her father, after which he carried out the vow he had made regarding her. She never had relations with a man. And it became a custom in Israel: 40 From year to year, the young women of Israel would go to give commendation to the daughter of Jephʹthah the Gilʹe·ad·ite four days in the year.
12 Then the men of Eʹphra·im were summoned, and they crossed over to Zaʹphon and said to Jephʹthah: “Why did you not call us to go with you when you crossed over to fight against the Amʹmon·ites? We will burn your house down with you in it.” 2 But Jephʹthah said to them: “Along with my people, I was engaged in a great conflict with the Amʹmon·ites. I did call to you for help, but you did not save me from their hand. 3 When I saw that you would not save me, then I decided to risk my life and go against the Amʹmon·ites, and Jehovah handed them over to me. So why have you come today to fight against me?”4 Jephʹthah then gathered all the men of Gilʹe·ad, and they fought Eʹphra·im; the men of Gilʹe·ad defeated Eʹphra·im, who had said: “You are only fugitives from Eʹphra·im, you Gilʹe·ad·ites in Eʹphra·im and Ma·nasʹseh.” 5 Gilʹe·ad captured the fords of the Jordan ahead of Eʹphra·im; and when the men of Eʹphra·im were trying to escape, they would say, “Let me cross over”; then the men of Gilʹe·ad would ask each one, “Are you an Eʹphra·im·ite?” When he would reply, “No!” 6 they would say to him, “Please say Shibʹbo·leth.” But he would say, “Sibʹbo·leth,” as he was unable to say the word correctly. Then they would seize him and slay him at the fords of the Jordan. So 42,000 Eʹphra·im·ites fell at that time.7 Jephʹthah judged Israel for six years, after which Jephʹthah the Gilʹe·ad·ite died and was buried in his city in Gilʹe·ad.8 Ibʹzan from Bethʹle·hem judged Israel after him. 9 He had 30 sons and 30 daughters. He sent his daughters to marry men outside his clan, and he brought in 30 women to marry his sons. He judged Israel for seven years. 10 Then Ibʹzan died and was buried in Bethʹle·hem.11 After him Eʹlon the Ze·buʹlu·nite judged Israel; he judged Israel for ten years. 12 Then Eʹlon the Ze·buʹlu·nite died and was buried in Aiʹja·lon in the land of Zebʹu·lun.13 After him Abʹdon the son of Hilʹlel the Pirʹa·thon·ite judged Israel. 14 He had 40 sons and 30 grandsons who rode on 70 donkeys. He judged Israel for eight years. 15 Then Abʹdon the son of Hilʹlel the Pirʹa·thon·ite died and was buried in Pirʹa·thon in the land of Eʹphra·im in the mountain of the A·malʹek·ite.
13 Again the Israelites did what was bad in Jehovah’s eyes, and Jehovah gave them into the hand of the Phi·lisʹtines for 40 years.2 Meanwhile, there was a man of Zoʹrah of the family of the Danʹites, whose name was Ma·noʹah. His wife was barren and childless. 3 In time Jehovah’s angel appeared to the woman and said to her: “Look, you are barren and childless. But you will conceive and give birth to a son. 4 Now be careful not to drink wine or anything alcoholic, and do not eat anything unclean. 5 Look! You will conceive and give birth to a son, and no razor should touch his head, because the child will be a Nazʹi·rite of God from birth, and he will take the lead in saving Israel out of the hand of the Phi·lisʹtines.”6 Then the woman went and told her husband: “A man of the true God came to me, and his appearance was like an angel of the true God, very awe-inspiring. I did not ask him where he was from, nor did he tell me his name. 7 But he said to me, ‘Look! You will conceive and give birth to a son. Now do not drink wine or anything alcoholic, and do not eat anything unclean, because the child will be a Nazʹi·rite of God from birth until the day of his death.’”8 Ma·noʹah pleaded with Jehovah and said: “Pardon me, Jehovah. Please let the man of the true God whom you just sent come again to instruct us about what we should do with the child who will be born.” 9 So the true God listened to Ma·noʹah, and the angel of the true God came again to the woman while she was sitting in the field; her husband Ma·noʹah was not with her. 10 The woman quickly ran and told her husband: “Look! The man who came to me the other day has appeared to me.”11 Then Ma·noʹah got up and went with his wife. He came to the man and said to him: “Are you the man who spoke to my wife?” He said: “I am.” 12 Then Ma·noʹah said: “May your words come true! What will be the child’s manner of life, and what will be his work?” 13 So Jehovah’s angel said to Ma·noʹah: “Your wife should keep herself from everything that I mentioned to her. 14 She should not eat anything that the grapevine produces, she should not drink wine or anything alcoholic, and she should not eat anything unclean. Everything that I commanded her, let her observe.”15 Ma·noʹah now said to Jehovah’s angel: “Please stay, and let us prepare a young goat for you.” 16 But Jehovah’s angel said to Ma·noʹah: “If I stay, I will not eat your food; but if you wish to present a burnt offering to Jehovah, you may offer it up.” Ma·noʹah did not know that he was Jehovah’s angel. 17 Then Ma·noʹah said to Jehovah’s angel: “What is your name, so that we may honor you when your word comes true?” 18 However, Jehovah’s angel said to him: “Why are you asking about my name, seeing that it is a wonderful one?”19 Then Ma·noʹah took the young goat and the grain offering and offered them on the rock to Jehovah. And He was doing something amazing while Ma·noʹah and his wife were looking on. 20 As the flame ascended from the altar heavenward, Jehovah’s angel ascended in the flame from the altar while Ma·noʹah and his wife were looking on. At once they fell with their faces to the ground. 21 Jehovah’s angel did not appear again to Ma·noʹah and his wife. Then Ma·noʹah realized that he was Jehovah’s angel. 22 Ma·noʹah then said to his wife: “We are sure to die, because it is God whom we have seen.” 23 But his wife said to him: “If Jehovah wanted to put us to death, he would not have accepted a burnt offering and a grain offering from our hand, he would not have shown us all these things, and he would not have told us any of these things.”24 The woman later gave birth to a son and named him Samson; and as the boy grew, Jehovah continued to bless him. 25 In time Jehovah’s spirit started to impel him in Maʹha·neh-dan, between Zoʹrah and Eshʹta·ol.
14 Then Samson went down to Timʹnah, and in Timʹnah he saw a Phi·lisʹtine woman. 2 So he went up and told his father and mother: “In Timʹnah a Phi·lisʹtine woman caught my eye, and I want you to get her for me as a wife.” 3 But his father and mother said to him: “Can you not find a woman among your relatives and among all our people? Must you go and take a wife from among the uncircumcised Phi·lisʹtines?” But Samson said to his father: “Get her for me, because she is the right one for me.” 4 His father and mother did not realize that this was from Jehovah, for He was looking for an opportunity against the Phi·lisʹtines, as the Phi·lisʹtines were ruling over Israel at that time.5 So Samson went down with his father and mother to Timʹnah. When he reached the vineyards of Timʹnah, why look! a lion came roaring at him. 6 Then Jehovah’s spirit empowered him, and he tore it in two, just as someone tears a young goat in two with his bare hands. But he did not tell his father or mother what he had done. 7 Then he went down and spoke to the woman, and she was still the right one in Samson’s eyes.8 Later when he was going back to take her home, he turned aside to look at the dead body of the lion, and there in the lion’s carcass was a swarm of bees and honey. 9 So he scraped the honey out into his hands and ate it as he walked along. When he rejoined his father and mother, he gave them some to eat. But he did not tell them that he had scraped the honey out of the carcass of a lion.10 His father went down to the woman, and Samson held a banquet there, for that was what the young men used to do. 11 When they saw him, they brought 30 groomsmen to accompany him. 12 Then Samson said to them: “Please let me tell you a riddle. If during the seven days of the banquet you solve it and tell me the answer, I will have to give you 30 linen garments and 30 outfits of clothing. 13 But if you are unable to tell me the answer, you must give me 30 linen garments and 30 outfits of clothing.” They said: “Tell us your riddle; we want to hear it.” 14 So he said to them:“Out of the eater came something to eat,And out of the strong came something sweet.”They were unable to solve the riddle for three days. 15 On the fourth day, they said to Samson’s wife: “Trick your husband so that he will tell us the answer to the riddle. Otherwise, we will burn you and your father’s house with fire. Did you invite us here to take our possessions?” 16 So Samson’s wife wept over him and said: “You must hate me; you do not love me. You told a riddle to my people, but you have not told the answer to me.” At this he said to her: “Why, I have not told it even to my own father and mother! Should I tell it to you?” 17 But she kept weeping over him the rest of the seven-day banquet. He finally told her on the seventh day, because she had pressured him. Then she told her people the answer to the riddle. 18 So on the seventh day before the sun set, the men of the city said to him:“What is sweeter than honey,And what is stronger than a lion?”He replied to them:“If you had not plowed with my young cow,You would not have solved my riddle.”19 Then Jehovah’s spirit empowered him, and he went down to Ashʹke·lon and struck down 30 of their men and took their clothing and gave the outfits to those who had answered the riddle. He was furious as he went back up to his father’s house.20 Samson’s wife was then given to one of his groomsmen who had accompanied him.
15 After a while, in the days of the wheat harvest, Samson went to visit his wife, bringing a young goat. He said: “I wish to go in to my wife in the bedroom.” But her father did not allow him to go in. 2 Her father said: “I thought, ‘You must surely hate her.’ So I gave her to your groomsman. Is not her younger sister more attractive than she is? Please, take her instead.” 3 However, Samson said to them: “This time I cannot be blamed by the Phi·lisʹtines for harming them.”4 So Samson went and caught 300 foxes. Then he took torches, turned the foxes tail to tail, and put one torch between each pair of tails. 5 Then he set fire to the torches and sent the foxes out into the fields of standing grain of the Phi·lisʹtines. He set on fire everything from sheaf to standing grain, as well as the vineyards and the olive groves.6 The Phi·lisʹtines asked: “Who did this?” They were told: “It was Samson, the son-in-law of the Timʹnite, because he took his wife and gave her to his groomsman.” At that the Phi·lisʹtines went up and burned her and her father with fire. 7 Then Samson said to them: “If this is how you act, I will not quit until I take revenge on you.” 8 Then he struck them down one after the other with a great slaughter, after which he went down and stayed in a cave of the crag Eʹtam.9 Later the Phi·lisʹtines came up and camped in Judah and were tramping about in Leʹhi. 10 Then the men of Judah said: “Why have you come up against us?” to which they answered: “We have come up to capture Samson, to do to him just as he did to us.” 11 So 3,000 men of Judah went down to the cave of the crag Eʹtam and said to Samson: “Do you not know that the Phi·lisʹtines are ruling over us? So why have you done this to us?” He said to them: “As they did to me, so I did to them.” 12 But they said to him: “We have come to capture you and to hand you over to the Phi·lisʹtines.” Then Samson said: “Swear to me that you yourselves will not assault me.” 13 They said to him: “No, we will only tie you and hand you over to them, but we will not put you to death.”So they bound him with two new ropes and brought him up from the crag. 14 When he came to Leʹhi, the Phi·lisʹtines shouted triumphantly at meeting him. Then Jehovah’s spirit empowered him, and the ropes on his arms became like linen threads that were scorched with fire, and his fetters melted off his hands. 15 He now found a fresh jawbone of a male donkey; he reached out and grabbed it and struck down 1,000 men with it. 16 Then Samson said:“With the jawbone of a donkey—one heap, two heaps!With the jawbone of a donkey I struck down 1,000 men.”17 When he finished speaking, he threw the jawbone away and called that place Raʹmath-leʹhi. 18 Then he became very thirsty, and he called on Jehovah and said: “It was you who gave this great salvation into the hand of your servant. But now am I to die of thirst and fall into the hands of the uncircumcised?” 19 So God split open a hollow that was in Leʹhi, and water flowed from it. When he drank, his spirit returned and he revived. That is why he named the place En-hak·korʹe, which is in Leʹhi to this day.20 And he judged Israel in the days of the Phi·lisʹtines for 20 years.
16 One time Samson went to Gazʹa and saw a prostitute there, and he went in to her. 2 The Gazʹites were told: “Samson has come here.” So they surrounded him and lay in ambush for him all night long in the city gate. They stayed quiet the whole night, saying to themselves: “When daylight comes, we will kill him.”3 However, Samson kept lying there until midnight. Then he got up at midnight and grabbed the doors of the city gate and the two side posts and pulled them out along with the bar. He put them on his shoulders and carried them up to the top of the mountain that faces Hebʹron.4 After that he fell in love with a woman in the Valley of Soʹrek whose name was De·liʹlah. 5 So the lords of the Phi·lisʹtines approached her and said: “Trick him and find out what gives him such great strength and how we can overpower him and tie him and subdue him. For this we will each give you 1,100 silver pieces.”6 De·liʹlah later said to Samson: “Please tell me where your great power comes from and what can be used to tie you and subdue you.” 7 Samson said to her: “If they tie me with seven fresh bowstrings that have not been dried out, I will grow as weak as an ordinary man.” 8 So the lords of the Phi·lisʹtines brought up to her seven fresh bowstrings that had not been dried out, and she tied him with them. 9 Now they set an ambush in the inner room, and she called out to him: “The Phi·lisʹtines are upon you, Samson!” At that he tore apart the bowstrings, just as easily as a thread of flax comes apart when it touches fire. The secret of his power did not become known.10 Then De·liʹlah said to Samson: “Look! You have fooled me and told me lies. Now tell me, please, what can be used to tie you.” 11 So he said to her: “If they tie me up with new ropes that have not been used for work, I will grow as weak as an ordinary man.” 12 So De·liʹlah took new ropes and tied him with them and called out: “The Phi·lisʹtines are upon you, Samson!” (All the while the ambush was set in the inner room.) At that he tore them off his arms like threads.13 After that De·liʹlah said to Samson: “Up until now you have fooled me and told me lies. Tell me what can be used to tie you.” Then he said to her: “If you weave the seven braids of my head with the warp thread.” 14 So she fixed them with a pin and called out to him: “The Phi·lisʹtines are upon you, Samson!” So he woke up from his sleep and pulled out the loom pin and the warp thread.15 She now said to him: “How can you say, ‘I love you,’ when your heart is not with me? These three times you have fooled me and have not told me the source of your great power.” 16 Because day after day she kept nagging him and pressuring him, he was weary to the point of dying. 17 So he finally opened his heart to her, saying: “A razor has never touched my head, because I am a Nazʹi·rite of God from birth. If I am shaved, my power will leave me and I will grow weak and become like all other men.”18 When De·liʹlah saw that he had opened his heart to her, she immediately summoned the Phi·lisʹtine lords, saying: “Come up this time, for he has opened his heart to me.” So the Phi·lisʹtine lords came up to her, bringing the money with them. 19 She made him fall asleep on her knees; then she called the man and had him shave off the seven braids of his head. After that she began to have control over him, for his power was leaving him. 20 Now she called out: “The Phi·lisʹtines are upon you, Samson!” He woke up from his sleep and said: “I will go out as at other times and shake myself free.” But he did not know that Jehovah had left him. 21 So the Phi·lisʹtines seized him and bored his eyes out. Then they brought him down to Gazʹa and bound him with two copper fetters, and he became a grinder of grain in the prison. 22 But the hair of his head started to grow back again after he had been shaved.23 The Phi·lisʹtine lords gathered together to offer a great sacrifice to Daʹgon their god and to celebrate, for they were saying: “Our god has given Samson our enemy into our hand!” 24 When the people saw him, they praised their god and said: “Our god has given into our hand our enemy, the one who devastated our land and killed so many of us.”25 Because their heart was cheerful, they said: “Call Samson to provide us some amusement.” So they called Samson out of the prison to entertain them; they made him stand between the pillars. 26 Then Samson said to the boy holding him by the hand: “Let me feel the pillars that support the house, so that I can lean against them.” 27 (Incidentally, the house was full of men and women. All the Phi·lisʹtine lords were there, and on the roof there were about 3,000 men and women who were looking on while Samson provided amusement.)28 Samson now called out to Jehovah: “Sovereign Lord Jehovah, remember me, please, and strengthen me, please, just this once, O God, and let me take revenge on the Phi·lisʹtines for one of my two eyes.”29 Then Samson braced himself against the two middle pillars that supported the house, and he leaned on them with his right hand on one and his left hand on the other. 30 Samson called out: “Let me die with the Phi·lisʹtines!” Then he pushed with all his might, and the house fell on the lords and all the people in it. So he killed more at his death than he had killed during his life.31 Later his brothers and all his father’s family came down to take him back. They brought him up and buried him between Zoʹrah and Eshʹta·ol in the tomb of Ma·noʹah his father. He had judged Israel for 20 years.
17 There was a man of the mountainous region of Eʹphra·im named Miʹcah. 2 He said to his mother: “The 1,100 silver pieces that were taken from you about which you pronounced a curse, which I heard—look! the silver is with me. I was the one who took it.” At that his mother said: “May Jehovah bless my son.” 3 So he gave the 1,100 pieces of silver back to his mother, but his mother said: “I will without fail sanctify the silver to Jehovah from my hand for my son to use in making a carved image and a metal statue. Now I give it back to you.”4 After he returned the silver to his mother, his mother took 200 silver pieces and gave them to the silversmith. He made a carved image and a metal statue; and they were put in Miʹcah’s house. 5 This man Miʹcah had a house of gods, and he made an ephʹod and teraphim statues and installed one of his sons to serve as priest for him. 6 In those days, there was no king in Israel. Each one was doing what was right in his own eyes.7 Now there was a young man of Bethʹle·hem in Judah who was of the family of Judah. He was a Levite who had been living there for a time. 8 The man left the city of Bethʹle·hem in Judah to find a place to live. While on his journey, he came to the mountainous region of Eʹphra·im, to the house of Miʹcah. 9 Then Miʹcah said to him: “Where do you come from?” He replied: “I am a Levite from Bethʹle·hem in Judah, and I am on my way to find a place to live.” 10 So Miʹcah said to him: “Stay with me and serve as a father and a priest for me. I will give you ten silver pieces a year and a set of garments and your food.” So the Levite went in. 11 Thus the Levite agreed to stay with the man, and the young man became like one of his sons. 12 Furthermore, Miʹcah installed the Levite to serve as a priest for him, and he lived in the house of Miʹcah. 13 Then Miʹcah said: “Now I know that Jehovah will be good to me, for the Levite has become my priest.”
18 In those days there was no king in Israel. And in those days the tribe of the Danʹites was looking for an inheritance to dwell in, because until then they had not received an inheritance among the tribes of Israel.2 The Danʹites sent five men from among their family, capable men from Zoʹrah and Eshʹta·ol, to spy out the land and to explore it. They said to them: “Go, explore the land.” When they came to the mountainous region of Eʹphra·im, to the house of Miʹcah, they spent the night there. 3 While they were near the house of Miʹcah, they recognized the voice of the young Levite man, so they went over to him and asked: “Who brought you here? What are you doing in this place? What is keeping you here?” 4 He replied to them: “Thus and so Miʹcah did for me, and he hired me to serve as priest for him.” 5 Then they said to him: “Please ask God whether our journey will be successful.” 6 The priest said to them: “Go in peace. Jehovah is with you on your journey.”7 So the five men went on and came to Laʹish. They saw how the people in it were dwelling in self-reliance in the manner of the Si·doʹni·ans. They were quiet and unsuspecting, and no oppressive conqueror was in the land to disturb them. They were far away from the Si·doʹni·ans, and they had no dealings with anyone else.8 When they returned to their brothers at Zoʹrah and Eshʹta·ol, their brothers said to them: “How did it go?” 9 They replied: “Let us go up against them, for we have seen that the land is very good. Why are you hesitant? Do not delay to go in to take possession of the land. 10 When you arrive, you will find an unsuspecting people, and the land is spacious. God has given it into your hand, a place where there is no lack of anything on the earth.”11 Then 600 men armed for battle from the family of the Danʹites departed from Zoʹrah and Eshʹta·ol. 12 They went up and camped at Kirʹi·ath-jeʹa·rim in Judah. That is why that place, which is west of Kirʹi·ath-jeʹa·rim, is called Maʹha·neh-dan to this day. 13 They went from there to the mountainous region of Eʹphra·im and came to the house of Miʹcah.14 Then the five men who had gone to spy out the land of Laʹish said to their brothers: “Did you know that there are in these houses an ephʹod, teraphim statues, a carved image, and a metal statue? Think about what you should do.” 15 So they stopped there and came to the house of the young Levite man at the house of Miʹcah and asked how he was. 16 All the while the 600 men of Dan, armed for battle, stood at the entrance of the gate. 17 The five men who had gone to spy out the land went inside to take the carved image, the ephʹod, the teraphim statues, and the metal image. (The priest was standing at the entrance of the gate with the 600 men armed for battle.) 18 They went into the house of Miʹcah and took the carved image, the ephʹod, the teraphim statues, and the metal image. The priest said to them: “What are you doing?” 19 But they said to him: “Be quiet. Put your hand over your mouth, and come with us to be a father and a priest for us. Which is better—for you to be a priest to the house of one man or to become a priest to a tribe and family in Israel?” 20 So the priest was satisfied, and he took the ephʹod, the teraphim statues, and the carved image and went off with the people.21 Then they turned to go on their way, putting the children, the livestock, and the valuable things ahead of them. 22 They had gone some distance away from the house of Miʹcah when the men who lived in the houses near the house of Miʹcah gathered together and caught up with the Danʹites. 23 When they cried out to the Danʹites, they turned to face them and said to Miʹcah: “What is the matter? Why have you been gathered together?” 24 So he said: “You have taken my gods that I made, and you have gone off with the priest too. What do I have left? How, then, can you ask me, ‘What is the matter with you?’” 25 The Danʹites replied: “Do not raise your voice against us; otherwise, angry men may assault you, and that would cost you your life and the lives of your household.” 26 So the Danʹites went on their way; and Miʹcah, seeing that they were stronger than he was, turned and went back to his house.27 After they took what Miʹcah had made, as well as his priest, they went to Laʹish, to a people quiet and unsuspecting. They struck them down with the sword and burned the city with fire. 28 There was no one to rescue it, for it was far from Siʹdon and they had no dealings with anyone else and it was in the valley plain that belonged to Beth-reʹhob. Then they rebuilt the city and settled in it. 29 Furthermore, they named the city Dan after the name of their father, Dan, who was born to Israel. But Laʹish was the city’s former name. 30 After that the Danʹites set up the carved image for themselves, and Jonʹa·than the son of Gerʹshom, the son of Moses, and his sons became priests to the tribe of the Danʹites until the day that the inhabitants of the land went into exile. 31 And they set up the carved image that Miʹcah had made, and it remained there all the days that the house of the true God was in Shiʹloh.
19 In those days, when there was no king in Israel, a Levite who was then living in a remote part of the mountainous region of Eʹphra·im took a concubine from Bethʹle·hem in Judah as his wife. 2 But his concubine was unfaithful to him, and she left him to go to her father’s house at Bethʹle·hem in Judah. She remained there for four months. 3 Then her husband went after her to persuade her to come back; he had his male attendant and a couple of donkeys with him. So she brought him into her father’s house. When her father saw him, he was glad to meet him. 4 So his father-in-law, the young woman’s father, convinced him to stay with him three days; and they would eat and drink, and he would spend the night there.5 On the fourth day, when they got up early in the morning to go, the father of the young woman said to his son-in-law: “Eat something to give you strength, and then you may go.” 6 So they sat down, and they both ate and drank together; after that the father of the young woman said to the man: “Please, stay overnight and enjoy yourself.” 7 When the man rose to go, his father-in-law kept begging him, so he stayed overnight again.8 When he got up early in the morning on the fifth day to go, the father of the young woman said: “Please, eat something to give you strength.” And they lingered until it was late in the day, and they both kept eating. 9 When the man rose to go with his concubine and his attendant, his father-in-law, the young woman’s father, said to him: “Look, now! It is almost evening. Please, stay overnight. Here the day is coming to an end. Stay here overnight and enjoy yourself. Tomorrow you can get up early for your journey and go to your home.” 10 However, the man did not want to stay another night, so he got up and traveled as far as Jeʹbus, that is, Jerusalem. He had with him the two saddled donkeys, his concubine, and his attendant.11 When they were close to Jeʹbus, the daylight was nearly gone. So the attendant said to his master: “Should we stop at this city of the Jebʹu·sites and stay overnight here?” 12 But his master said to him: “We should not stop at a city of foreigners who are not Israelites. We will go on as far as Gibʹe·ah.” 13 Then he said to his attendant: “Come and let us try to reach one of those places; we will stay overnight either in Gibʹe·ah or in Raʹmah.” 14 So they went on their way, and the sun began to set when they were near Gibʹe·ah, which belongs to Benjamin.15 So they stopped there and went in to stay overnight in Gibʹe·ah. Once inside, they sat down in the public square of the city, but nobody took them into his house to stay overnight. 16 Eventually that evening, an old man came in from his work in the field. He was from the mountainous region of Eʹphra·im, and he was living for a time in Gibʹe·ah; but the residents of the city were Benʹja·min·ites. 17 When he looked up and saw the traveler in the public square of the city, the old man said: “Where are you going, and where do you come from?” 18 He replied: “We are traveling from Bethʹle·hem in Judah to a remote area of the mountainous region of Eʹphra·im, where I am from. I went to Bethʹle·hem in Judah, and I am going to the house of Jehovah, but nobody is taking me into his house. 19 We have enough straw and fodder for our donkeys, and bread and wine for me, the woman, and our attendant. There is nothing lacking.” 20 However, the old man said: “May you have peace! Let me take care of anything you need. Just do not stay overnight in the public square.” 21 So he brought him into his house and gave feed to the donkeys. Then they washed their feet and ate and drank.22 While they were enjoying themselves, some worthless men of the city surrounded the house and were pounding on the door, and they kept saying to the old man who owned the house: “Bring out the man who came into your house, so that we may have sex with him.” 23 At that the owner of the house went out and said to them: “No, my brothers, do not act wickedly. Please, this man is a guest in my house. Do not commit this disgraceful act. 24 Here are my virgin daughter and this man’s concubine. Let me bring them out, and you can humiliate them if you must. But you must not commit this disgraceful act toward this man.”25 But the men refused to listen to him, so the man grabbed hold of his concubine and brought her outside to them. They raped her and abused her all night long until the morning. Then they sent her away at the break of dawn. 26 Early in the morning, the woman came and fell down at the entrance of the man’s house where her master was and lay there until it was light. 27 When her master got up in the morning and opened the doors of the house to go out to resume his journey, he saw the woman, his concubine, lying at the entrance of the house with her hands on the threshold. 28 So he said to her: “Get up; let us go.” But there was no answer. The man then put her on the donkey and set out for his home.29 When he reached his house, he took the slaughtering knife and took hold of his concubine and cut her up limb by limb into 12 pieces and sent one piece into each territory of Israel. 30 All who saw it said: “Such a thing has never happened or been seen from the day that the Israelites went up out of the land of Egypt down to this day. Consider it, take counsel, and tell us what to do.”
2 Then Jehovah’s angel went up from Gilʹgal to Boʹchim and said: “I brought you up out of Egypt into the land about which I swore to your forefathers. Furthermore, I said, ‘I will never break my covenant with you. 2 For your part, you must not make a covenant with the inhabitants of this land and you should pull down their altars.’ But you have not obeyed my voice. Why have you done this? 3 That is why I also said, ‘I will not drive them away from before you, and they will ensnare you, and their gods will lure you away.’”4 When Jehovah’s angel spoke these words to all the Israelites, the people began to weep loudly. 5 So they named that place Boʹchim, and they sacrificed there to Jehovah.6 When Joshua sent the people away, each of the Israelites went to his inheritance to take possession of the land. 7 The people continued to serve Jehovah all the days of Joshua and all the days of the elders who outlived Joshua and who had seen all of Jehovah’s great deeds in behalf of Israel. 8 Then Joshua the son of Nun, the servant of Jehovah, died at the age of 110. 9 So they buried him in the territory of his inheritance in Timʹnath-heʹres, in the mountainous region of Eʹphra·im, north of Mount Gaʹash. 10 All that generation were gathered to their ancestors, and another generation arose after them that did not know Jehovah or what he had done for Israel.11 So the Israelites did what was bad in the eyes of Jehovah and served the Baʹals. 12 Thus they abandoned Jehovah, the God of their fathers, who brought them out of the land of Egypt. And they followed other gods, the gods of the peoples who were all around them, and they bowed down to them and offended Jehovah. 13 They abandoned Jehovah and served Baʹal and the Ashʹto·reth images. 14 At this Jehovah’s anger blazed against Israel, so he handed them over to plunderers who pillaged them. He sold them into the hand of the enemies around them, and they were no longer able to hold their own against their enemies. 15 Wherever they went, the hand of Jehovah was against them, bringing disaster on them, just as Jehovah had said and just as Jehovah had sworn to them, and they were in great distress. 16 So Jehovah would raise up judges who would save them from the hand of their plunderers.17 But they refused to listen even to the judges and would prostitute themselves to other gods and bow down to them. They quickly turned aside from the way in which their forefathers had walked, those who had obeyed the commandments of Jehovah. They failed to do that. 18 Whenever Jehovah did raise up judges for them, Jehovah would be with the judge and save them from the hand of their enemies all the days of the judge; for Jehovah was moved to pity over their groaning caused by those who oppressed them and those who were treating them abusively.19 But when the judge died, they would again act more corruptly than their fathers by following other gods, serving them and bowing down to them. They did not abandon their practices and their stubborn behavior. 20 Finally Jehovah’s anger blazed against Israel, and he said: “Because this nation has violated my covenant that I commanded their forefathers and they have disobeyed me, 21 I for my part will not drive out from before them even one of the nations that Joshua left behind when he died. 22 This is to test whether Israel will keep Jehovah’s way by walking in it as their fathers did.” 23 So Jehovah allowed these nations to remain. He did not drive them out quickly, and he did not give them into Joshua’s hand.
20 Consequently, all the Israelites came out from Dan down to Beʹer-sheʹba and from the land of Gilʹe·ad, and the entire assembly gathered unitedly before Jehovah at Mizʹpah. 2 So the chiefs of the people and all the tribes of Israel took their places in the congregation of God’s people—400,000 foot soldiers armed with swords.3 The Benʹja·min·ites heard that the men of Israel had gone up to Mizʹpah.Then the men of Israel said: “Tell us, how did this terrible thing happen?” 4 At this the Levite man, the husband of the murdered woman, said in answer: “I came to Gibʹe·ah of Benjamin with my concubine to stay overnight. 5 And the inhabitants of Gibʹe·ah rose up against me and surrounded the house by night. They meant to kill me, but they raped my concubine instead, and she died. 6 So I took my concubine’s body and cut it up and sent the pieces into every part of Israel’s inheritance, because they had committed a shameful and disgraceful act in Israel. 7 Now all you people of Israel, give your advice and counsel here.”8 Then all the people rose up in unison and said: “Not one of us will go to his tent or return to his house. 9 Now this is what we will do to Gibʹe·ah: We will go up against it by lot. 10 We will take 10 men out of 100 from all the tribes of Israel, and 100 out of 1,000 and 1,000 out of 10,000 to collect provisions for the army, so that they may take action against Gibʹe·ah of Benjamin, in view of the disgraceful act that they committed in Israel.” 11 Thus all the men of Israel were gathered against the city united as allies.12 Then the tribes of Israel sent men to all the tribesmen of Benjamin, saying: “What is this terrible thing that has happened among you? 13 Now hand over the worthless men from Gibʹe·ah, so that we may put them to death and clear out what is bad from Israel.” But the Benʹja·min·ites refused to listen to their Israelite brothers.14 Then the Benʹja·min·ites gathered together out of the cities to Gibʹe·ah to go out to battle against the men of Israel. 15 That day the Benʹja·min·ites mustered from their cities 26,000 men armed with swords, apart from the 700 chosen men of Gibʹe·ah. 16 In this army were 700 chosen men who were left-handed. Every one of these men could sling a stone to within a hairbreadth and would not miss.17 The men of Israel apart from Benjamin mustered 400,000 men armed with swords, and each one was an experienced warrior. 18 They rose up and went up to Bethʹel to inquire of God. Then the people of Israel said: “Who of us should go up in the lead to the battle against the Benʹja·min·ites?” Jehovah replied: “Judah is to take the lead.”19 After that the Israelites rose up in the morning and camped against Gibʹe·ah.20 The men of Israel now went out to battle against Benjamin; they drew up in battle formation against them at Gibʹe·ah. 21 So the Benʹja·min·ites came out from Gibʹe·ah and struck down 22,000 men of Israel on that day. 22 However, the army of the men of Israel showed themselves courageous and again drew up in battle formation in the same place as on the first day. 23 Then the Israelites went up and wept before Jehovah until the evening and inquired of Jehovah: “Should we again go into battle against our brothers, the people of Benjamin?” To this Jehovah said: “Go up against them.”24 So the Israelites drew near to the Benʹja·min·ites on the second day. 25 In turn Benjamin came out from Gibʹe·ah to meet them on the second day and struck down another 18,000 Israelites, all of them armed with swords. 26 At that all the men of Israel went up to Bethʹel. They wept and sat there before Jehovah, and they fasted on that day until the evening and offered up burnt offerings and communion offerings before Jehovah. 27 After that the men of Israel inquired of Jehovah, for the ark of the covenant of the true God was there in those days. 28 Now Phinʹe·has the son of El·e·aʹzar, the son of Aaron, was ministering before it in those days. They asked: “Should we go out yet again to battle against our brothers, the men of Benjamin, or should we stop?” Jehovah replied: “Go up, because tomorrow I will give them into your hand.” 29 Then Israel set men in ambush all around Gibʹe·ah.30 The Israelites went up against the Benʹja·min·ites on the third day, and they drew up in formation against Gibʹe·ah the same as at the other times. 31 When the Benʹja·min·ites went out to meet the army, they were drawn away from the city. Then, as at the other times, they started to attack and kill some of the men on the highways, one of which goes up to Bethʹel and the other to Gibʹe·ah, leaving about 30 men of Israel dead in the open field. 32 So the Benʹja·min·ites said: “They are suffering defeat before us the same as before.” But the Israelites said: “We will retreat and draw them away from the city onto the highways.” 33 So all the men of Israel rose up from their places and drew up in formation at Baʹal-taʹmar while the Israelite ambush charged out of their places in the vicinity of Gibʹe·ah. 34 Thus 10,000 chosen men out of all Israel came in front of Gibʹe·ah, and the fighting was heavy. But the Benʹja·min·ites did not know that disaster was near at hand.35 Jehovah defeated Benjamin before Israel, and on that day the Israelites struck down 25,100 men in Benjamin, all of them armed with swords.36 However, the Benʹja·min·ites imagined that the men of Israel would be defeated when they retreated from Benjamin, but they retreated because they trusted in the ambush that was set against Gibʹe·ah. 37 The ambush acted quickly and charged toward Gibʹe·ah. Then the ambush spread out and struck down the whole city with the sword.38 Now the men of Israel had arranged that the men who ambushed the city would make a smoke signal go up from there.39 When the Israelites turned around in the battle, the men of Benjamin started by attacking and killing about 30 men of Israel, and they said: “They are clearly suffering another defeat before us, just as in the previous battle.” 40 But the signal started to go up from the city as a pillar of smoke. When the men of Benjamin turned to look, they saw the whole city going up in flames to the sky. 41 Then the men of Israel made an about-face, and the men of Benjamin were dismayed, for they saw that disaster had overtaken them. 42 So they retreated from the men of Israel toward the wilderness, but the battle followed them; the men coming out of the cities joined in striking them down. 43 They surrounded the Benʹja·min·ites and pursued them relentlessly. They trampled them down directly in front of Gibʹe·ah toward the east. 44 Finally 18,000 men of Benjamin fell, all mighty warriors.45 The men of Benjamin turned and fled into the wilderness to the crag of Rimʹmon, and the Israelites killed 5,000 of them on the highways, and they kept pursuing them as far as Giʹdom; so they struck down 2,000 more men. 46 All those of Benjamin who fell on that day amounted to 25,000 men armed with swords, all mighty warriors. 47 But 600 retreated into the wilderness to the crag of Rimʹmon, and they stayed on the crag of Rimʹmon for four months.48 And the men of Israel turned back against the Benʹja·min·ites and struck those of the city with the sword, from men to livestock, all that remained. Also, they set all the cities in their path on fire.
21 Now the men of Israel had sworn this oath in Mizʹpah: “Not one of us will give his daughter to a man from Benjamin as a wife.” 2 Consequently, the people came to Bethʹel and sat there before the true God until evening, crying out and weeping bitterly. 3 And they were saying: “Why, O Jehovah the God of Israel, has this happened in Israel? Why should one tribe be missing today from Israel?” 4 And the next day the people got up early and built an altar there to offer up burnt offerings and communion offerings.5 Then the people of Israel said: “Who of all the tribes of Israel did not come up to assemble before Jehovah?” for they had taken a great oath that anyone who did not come up to Jehovah at Mizʹpah would be put to death without fail. 6 So the people of Israel felt sorrow over what had happened to Benjamin their brother. They said: “Today one tribe has been chopped off from Israel. 7 What should we do to provide wives for those who are left, now that we have sworn by Jehovah not to give them any of our daughters as wives?”8 They asked: “Who among the tribes of Israel did not come up to Jehovah at Mizʹpah?” It so happened that no one had come from Jaʹbesh-gilʹe·ad into the camp where the congregation was. 9 When the people were counted, they saw that none of the inhabitants of Jaʹbesh-gilʹe·ad were there. 10 So the assembly sent there 12,000 of the mightiest men. They commanded them: “Go and strike down the inhabitants of Jaʹbesh-gilʹe·ad with the sword, even the women and the children. 11 This is what you should do: Every male, as well as every woman who has had sexual relations with a male, you should devote to destruction.” 12 Among the inhabitants of Jaʹbesh-gilʹe·ad, they found 400 girls who were virgins, who had never had sexual relations with a man. So they brought them to the camp at Shiʹloh, which is in the land of Caʹnaan.13 Then all the assembly sent a message to the Benʹja·min·ites on the crag of Rimʹmon and offered them peace. 14 So Benjamin came back at that time. They gave them the women whom they had kept alive from the women of Jaʹbesh-gilʹe·ad, but they did not find enough for them. 15 And the people felt sorrow over what had happened to Benjamin because Jehovah had made a division among the tribes of Israel. 16 The elders of the assembly said: “What should we do to provide wives for the remaining men, since all the women were annihilated out of Benjamin?” 17 They replied: “There should be an inheritance for the survivors of Benjamin, so that a tribe may not be wiped out of Israel. 18 But we are not allowed to give them wives from our daughters, because the people of Israel have sworn: ‘Cursed is the one who gives a wife to Benjamin.’”19 Then they said: “Look! There is a festival of Jehovah from year to year in Shiʹloh, which is north of Bethʹel and east of the highway that goes up from Bethʹel to Sheʹchem and south of Le·boʹnah.” 20 So they commanded the men of Benjamin: “Go and set an ambush in the vineyards. 21 And when you see the young women of Shiʹloh come out to join in their circle dances, each of you should come out from the vineyards and seize a wife from the young women of Shiʹloh, and you should return to the land of Benjamin. 22 And should their fathers or their brothers come to make a complaint against us, we will then tell them, ‘Show us favor for their sakes, because we could not provide each one a wife by war and you could not give a wife to them without becoming guilty.’”23 So the men of Benjamin did just that, and they each carried off a wife from the women who were dancing. After that they went back to their inheritance and rebuilt their cities and settled in them.24 And the Israelites dispersed from there at that time, each one to his tribe and his family, and they departed from there, each one to his inheritance.25 In those days there was no king in Israel. Each one was doing what was right in his own eyes.
3 These are the nations that Jehovah allowed to remain so that they could test all those of Israel who had not experienced any of the wars of Caʹnaan 2 (this was so that succeeding generations of Israelites would experience war, those who had not experienced such things before): 3 the five lords of the Phi·lisʹtines, and all the Caʹnaan·ites, the Si·doʹni·ans, and the Hiʹvites inhabiting Mount Lebʹa·non from Mount Baʹal-herʹmon as far as Leʹbo-haʹmath. 4 They served as a means of testing Israel to determine whether Israel would obey Jehovah’s commandments that he had given their fathers through Moses. 5 So the Israelites lived among the Caʹnaan·ites, the Hitʹtites, the Amʹor·ites, the Perʹiz·zites, the Hiʹvites, and the Jebʹu·sites. 6 They would take their daughters as wives, and their own daughters they gave to their sons, and they began serving their gods.7 So the Israelites did what was bad in Jehovah’s eyes, and they forgot Jehovah their God and were serving the Baʹals and the sacred poles. 8 At this Jehovah’s anger blazed against Israel, and he sold them into the hand of Cuʹshan-rish·a·thaʹim the king of Mes·o·po·taʹmi·a. The Israelites served Cuʹshan-rish·a·thaʹim for eight years. 9 When the Israelites called to Jehovah for help, Jehovah raised up a savior to rescue the Israelites, Othʹni·el the son of Keʹnaz, the younger brother of Caʹleb. 10 The spirit of Jehovah came upon him, and he became the judge of Israel. When he went out to battle, Jehovah gave Cuʹshan-rish·a·thaʹim the king of Mes·o·po·taʹmi·a into his hand so that he prevailed over Cuʹshan-rish·a·thaʹim. 11 After that the land had rest for 40 years. Then Othʹni·el the son of Keʹnaz died.12 And once again the Israelites began doing what was bad in Jehovah’s eyes. So Jehovah let Egʹlon the king of Moʹab prevail over Israel, because they did what was bad in Jehovah’s eyes. 13 Furthermore, he brought against them the Amʹmon·ites and the A·malʹek·ites. They attacked Israel and captured the city of palm trees. 14 The Israelites served Egʹlon the king of Moʹab for 18 years. 15 Then the Israelites called to Jehovah for help, so Jehovah raised up for them a savior, Eʹhud the son of Geʹra, a Benʹja·min·ite who was left-handed. In time the Israelites sent tribute through him to Egʹlon the king of Moʹab. 16 Meanwhile, Eʹhud made for himself a two-edged sword, a cubit long, and he strapped it underneath his garment on his right thigh. 17 He then presented the tribute to Egʹlon the king of Moʹab. Now Egʹlon was a very fat man.18 When Eʹhud finished presenting the tribute, he sent away the people who had carried the tribute. 19 But after reaching the carved images at Gilʹgal, he himself went back and said: “I have a secret message for you, O king.” So the king said: “Silence!” With that all his attendants left him. 20 So Eʹhud came to him as he was sitting alone in his cool roof chamber. Then Eʹhud said: “I have a message from God for you.” So he rose up from his throne. 21 Then Eʹhud drew the sword from his right thigh with his left hand and plunged it into his belly. 22 The handle went in after the blade, and the fat closed in over the blade, for he did not draw the sword out of his belly, and the fecal matter came out. 23 Eʹhud went out through the porch, closing the doors of the roof chamber behind him and locking them. 24 After he left, the servants returned and saw that the doors of the roof chamber were locked. So they said: “He must be relieving himself in the cool interior room.” 25 They kept waiting until they were embarrassed, but when they saw that he was still not opening the doors of the roof chamber, they took the key and opened them and saw their lord fallen to the floor dead!26 Eʹhud escaped while they were lingering, and he passed by the carved images and made it safely to Se·iʹrah. 27 When he arrived, he sounded the horn in the mountainous region of Eʹphra·im; and the Israelites went down out of the mountainous region, with him at their head. 28 Then he said to them: “Follow me, because Jehovah has given your enemies, the Moʹab·ites, into your hand.” So they followed him and captured the fords of the Jordan against the Moʹab·ites, and they did not allow anyone to cross. 29 At that time they struck down about 10,000 Moʹab·ites, all strong and valiant men; not a single one escaped. 30 So Moʹab was subdued on that day under Israel’s hand; and the land had rest for 80 years.31 After him was Shamʹgar the son of Aʹnath, who struck down 600 Phi·lisʹtine men with a cattle goad; he too saved Israel.
4 But after Eʹhud died, the Israelites again did what was bad in Jehovah’s eyes. 2 So Jehovah sold them into the hand of Jaʹbin the king of Caʹnaan, who reigned in Haʹzor. The chief of his army was Sisʹe·ra, who lived in Ha·roʹsheth of the nations. 3 The Israelites cried out to Jehovah, because Jaʹbin had 900 war chariots with iron scythes, and he harshly oppressed the Israelites for 20 years.4 Now Debʹo·rah, a prophetess, the wife of Lapʹpi·doth, was judging Israel at that time. 5 She used to sit under Debʹo·rah’s palm tree between Raʹmah and Bethʹel in the mountainous region of Eʹphra·im; the Israelites would go up to her for judgment. 6 She sent for Baʹrak the son of A·binʹo·am out of Keʹdesh-naphʹta·li and said to him: “Has not Jehovah the God of Israel given the command? ‘Go and march to Mount Taʹbor, and take 10,000 men of Naphʹta·li and Zebʹu·lun with you. 7 I will bring to you Sisʹe·ra, the chief of Jaʹbin’s army, along with his war chariots and his troops to the stream of Kiʹshon, and I will give him into your hand.’”8 At this Baʹrak said to her: “If you go with me, I will go, but if you do not go with me, I will not go.” 9 To this she said: “I will certainly go with you. However, the campaign you are going on will not bring you glory, for it will be into the hand of a woman that Jehovah will give Sisʹe·ra.” Then Debʹo·rah got up and went with Baʹrak to Keʹdesh. 10 Baʹrak summoned Zebʹu·lun and Naphʹta·li to Keʹdesh, and 10,000 men followed his steps. Debʹo·rah also went up with him.11 Incidentally, Heʹber the Kenʹite had separated from the Kenʹites, the descendants of Hoʹbab, Moses’ father-in-law, and his tent was pitched near the big tree in Za·a·nanʹnim, which is at Keʹdesh.12 They reported to Sisʹe·ra that Baʹrak the son of A·binʹo·am had gone up to Mount Taʹbor. 13 At once Sisʹe·ra assembled all his war chariots—900 chariots with iron scythes—and all the troops that were with him from Ha·roʹsheth of the nations to go to the stream of Kiʹshon. 14 Debʹo·rah now said to Baʹrak: “Rise up, for this is the day that Jehovah will give Sisʹe·ra into your hand. Is Jehovah not going out before you?” And Baʹrak descended from Mount Taʹbor with 10,000 men following him. 15 Then Jehovah threw Sisʹe·ra and all his war chariots and all the army into confusion before the sword of Baʹrak. Finally Sisʹe·ra got down from his chariot and fled on foot. 16 Baʹrak chased after the war chariots and the army as far as Ha·roʹsheth of the nations. So Sisʹe·ra’s whole army fell by the sword; not even one remained.17 But Sisʹe·ra fled on foot to the tent of Jaʹel the wife of Heʹber the Kenʹite, for there was peace between Jaʹbin the king of Haʹzor and the house of Heʹber the Kenʹite. 18 Then Jaʹel came out to meet Sisʹe·ra and said to him: “Come in, my lord, come in here. Do not be afraid.” So he went into her tent, and she covered him with a blanket. 19 Then he said to her: “Give me, please, a little water to drink, for I am thirsty.” So she opened a skin bottle of milk and gave him a drink, after which she again covered him. 20 He told her: “Stand at the entrance of the tent, and if anybody comes and asks you, ‘Is there a man here?’ say, ‘No!’”21 But Jaʹel the wife of Heʹber took a tent pin and a hammer in her hand. Then while he was fast asleep and exhausted, she stealthily approached him and drove the pin through his temples and beat it into the ground, and he died.22 Baʹrak went there in pursuit of Sisʹe·ra, and Jaʹel now came out to meet him and said: “Come and I will show you the man you are looking for.” He went in with her and saw Sisʹe·ra lying dead, with the tent pin through his temples.23 So on that day, God subdued Jaʹbin the king of Caʹnaan before the Israelites. 24 The hand of the Israelites came down harder and harder against Jaʹbin the king of Caʹnaan, until they destroyed Jaʹbin the king of Caʹnaan.
5 On that day Debʹo·rah along with Baʹrak the son of A·binʹo·am sang this song: 2 “Because of the unbound hair in Israel,Because of the people’s volunteering,Praise Jehovah! 3 Listen, you kings! Give ear, you rulers!To Jehovah I will sing.I will sing praises to Jehovah, Israel’s God. 4 Jehovah, when you went out from Seʹir,When you marched out of the territory of Eʹdom,The earth shook, and the heavens poured,The clouds poured down water. 5 Mountains melted before the face of Jehovah,Even Siʹnai before the face of Jehovah, Israel’s God. 6 In the days of Shamʹgar the son of Aʹnath,In the days of Jaʹel, the roads were deserted;Travelers kept to the back roads. 7 The villagers in Israel were no more;They were no more until I, Debʹo·rah, rose up,Until I arose as a mother in Israel. 8 They chose new gods;Then there was war in the gates.A shield could not be seen, nor a lance,Among 40,000 in Israel. 9 My heart is with the commanders of Israel,Who went as volunteers with the people.Praise Jehovah!10 You riders on tawny donkeys,You who sit on fine carpets,And you who walk on the road,Consider!11 The voices of the water distributors were heard at the watering places;There they were recounting the righteous acts of Jehovah,The righteous acts of his villagers in Israel.Then Jehovah’s people went down to the gates.12 Awake, awake, O Debʹo·rah!Awake, awake, sing a song!Rise up, Baʹrak! Lead your captives away, you son of A·binʹo·am!13 Then those who were left came down to the nobles;Jehovah’s people came down to me against the mighty.14 Out of Eʹphra·im was their origin, those in the valley;They are following you, O Benjamin, among your peoples.From Maʹchir the commanders went down,And from Zebʹu·lun those who bear the recruiter’s staff.15 The princes in Isʹsa·char were with Debʹo·rah,As was Isʹsa·char, so was Baʹrak.Into the valley plain he was sent on foot.Among the divisions of Reuʹben there was intense heart-searching.16 Why did you sit down between the two saddlebags,Listening to them playing their pipes for the flocks?For the divisions of Reuʹben, there was intense heart-searching.17 Gilʹe·ad remained beyond the Jordan;And Dan, why did he stay with the ships?Ashʹer sat idle at the seashore,And by his harbors he remained.18 Zebʹu·lun was a people who risked their lives to the point of death;Naphʹta·li also, on the open heights.19 Kings came, they fought;The kings of Caʹnaan then foughtIn Taʹa·nach, by the waters of Me·gidʹdo.No spoil of silver did they take.20 From heaven the stars fought;From their orbits they fought against Sisʹe·ra.21 The torrent of Kiʹshon washed them away,The ancient torrent, the torrent of Kiʹshon.You trampled down the powerful, O my soul.22 Then the hooves of horses poundedAs his stallions galloped furiously.23 ‘Curse Meʹroz,’ said the angel of Jehovah,‘Yes, curse its inhabitants,For they did not come to the assistance of Jehovah,To the assistance of Jehovah with the mighty ones.’24 Most blessed of women is JaʹelThe wife of Heʹber the Kenʹite;She is most blessed of women living in tents.25 He asked for water; she gave him milk.In a majestic banquet bowl she offered curdled milk.26 With her hand she reached for the tent pin,Her right hand for the workman’s mallet.And she hammered Sisʹe·ra, she crushed his head,And she smashed and pierced his temples.27 Between her feet he collapsed; he fell and lay still;Between her feet he collapsed and fell;Where he collapsed, there he fell defeated.28 From the window a woman looked out,Sisʹe·ra’s mother peered out from the lattice,‘Why is his chariot delayed in coming?Why are the hoofbeats of his chariots so late?’29 The wisest of her noble ladies would answer her;Yes, she too would repeat to herself,30 ‘They must be dividing the spoil they found,A girl, two girls, to every warrior,Spoil of dyed cloth for Sisʹe·ra, spoil of dyed cloth,An embroidered garment, dyed cloth, two embroidered garmentsFor the necks of the plunderers.’31 So let all your enemies perish, O Jehovah,But let those who love you be like the sun rising in its glory.”And the land had rest for 40 years.
6 But the Israelites again did what was bad in the eyes of Jehovah, so Jehovah gave them into the hand of Midʹi·an for seven years. 2 The hand of Midʹi·an dominated over Israel. Because of Midʹi·an, the Israelites made hiding places for themselves in the mountains, in the caves, and in the places difficult to approach. 3 If Israel sowed seed, Midʹi·an and Amʹa·lek and the Easterners would attack them. 4 They would camp against them and ruin the produce of the land all the way to Gazʹa, and they left nothing for Israel to eat and no sheep or bull or donkey. 5 For they would come up with their livestock and tents as numerous as the locusts, and they and their camels could not be numbered, and they would come into the land to destroy it. 6 So Israel became greatly impoverished on account of Midʹi·an; and the Israelites called to Jehovah for help.7 When the Israelites called to Jehovah for help because of Midʹi·an, 8 Jehovah sent to the Israelites a prophet who said to them: “This is what Jehovah the God of Israel says, ‘I brought you up from Egypt and thus brought you out of the house of slavery. 9 So I rescued you from the hand of Egypt and from all your oppressors and drove them out from before you and gave you their land. 10 And I said to you: “I am Jehovah your God. You must not fear the gods of the Amʹor·ites in whose land you are dwelling.” But you did not obey me.’”11 Later Jehovah’s angel came and sat under the big tree that was in Ophʹrah, which belonged to Joʹash the Abi-ezʹrite. His son Gidʹe·on was beating out wheat in the winepress in order to hide it from Midʹi·an. 12 Jehovah’s angel appeared to him and said: “Jehovah is with you, you mighty warrior.” 13 At this Gidʹe·on said to him: “Pardon me, my lord, but if Jehovah is with us, why has all of this come upon us? Where are all his wonderful acts that our fathers related to us, saying, ‘Did Jehovah not bring us up out of Egypt?’ Now Jehovah has deserted us and given us into Midʹi·an’s hand.” 14 Jehovah faced him and said: “Go with the strength you have, and you will save Israel out of Midʹi·an’s hand. Is it not I who send you?” 15 Gidʹe·on answered him: “Pardon me, Jehovah. How can I save Israel? Look! My clan is the least in Ma·nasʹseh, and I am the most insignificant in my father’s house.” 16 But Jehovah said to him: “Because I will be with you, you will strike down Midʹi·an as if they were one man.”17 Then he said to him: “If, now, I have found favor in your eyes, show me a sign that you are the one speaking with me. 18 Please do not depart from here until I return with my gift and set it before you.” So he said: “I will stay here until you return.” 19 And Gidʹe·on went in and prepared a young goat and made unleavened bread from an eʹphah of flour. He put the meat in the basket and the broth in the cooking pot; then he brought them out to him and served them under the big tree.20 The angel of the true God now said to him: “Take the meat and the unleavened bread and place them on the big rock there, and pour out the broth.” And he did so. 21 Then Jehovah’s angel stretched out the tip of the staff that was in his hand and touched the meat and the unleavened bread, and fire flared up from the rock and consumed the meat and the unleavened bread. Jehovah’s angel then vanished from his sight. 22 Gidʹe·on now realized that it was Jehovah’s angel.At once Gidʹe·on said: “Alas, Sovereign Lord Jehovah, for I have seen Jehovah’s angel face-to-face!” 23 But Jehovah said to him: “Peace be with you. Have no fear; you will not die.” 24 So Gidʹe·on built an altar there to Jehovah, and it is called Je·hoʹvah-shaʹlom down to this day. It is still in Ophʹrah of the Abi-ezʹrites.25 That night Jehovah said to him: “Take the young bull that belongs to your father, the second young bull that is seven years old, and tear down the altar of Baʹal that belongs to your father, and cut down the sacred pole next to it. 26 After you build an altar to Jehovah your God on top of this stronghold with the row of stones, take the second young bull and offer it as a burnt offering on the pieces of wood from the sacred pole that you cut down.” 27 So Gidʹe·on took ten men of his servants and did just as Jehovah told him. But he feared the household of his father and the men of the city too much to do it by day, so he did it at night.28 When the men of the city got up early the next morning, they saw that the altar of Baʹal had been pulled down and the sacred pole beside it had been cut down and the second young bull had been offered up on the altar that had been built. 29 They asked one another: “Who did this?” After they investigated, they said: “Gidʹe·on the son of Joʹash did this.” 30 So the men of the city said to Joʹash: “Bring your son out that he may die, because he pulled down the altar of Baʹal and cut down the sacred pole next to it.” 31 Joʹash then said to all those who confronted him: “Do you have to defend Baʹal? Do you have to save him? Whoever defends him should be put to death this morning. If he is a god, let him defend himself, since someone pulled down his altar.” 32 And he called Gidʹe·on Jer·ub·baʹal on that day, saying: “Let Baʹal defend himself, for someone has pulled down his altar.”33 All Midʹi·an and Amʹa·lek and the Easterners joined forces; and they crossed over into the Valley of Jezʹre·el and camped. 34 Then Jehovah’s spirit came upon Gidʹe·on and he sounded the horn, and the Abi-ezʹrites rallied behind him. 35 He sent out messengers through all of Ma·nasʹseh, and they too rallied behind him. He also sent out messengers through Ashʹer, Zebʹu·lun, and Naphʹta·li, and they came up to meet him.36 Then Gidʹe·on said to the true God: “If you are saving Israel by means of me, just as you have promised, 37 here I am laying a fleece of wool on the threshing floor. If there is dew on the fleece only but all the ground around it is dry, then I will know that you will save Israel by means of me, just as you have promised.” 38 And that is how it happened. When he rose up early the next day and wrung the fleece, he squeezed off enough dew from the fleece to fill a large banquet bowl with water. 39 However, Gidʹe·on said to the true God: “Do not let your anger burn against me, but let me ask just once more. Let me, please, make just one more test with the fleece. Please let the fleece alone be dry while there is dew all over the ground.” 40 So that is what God did that night; only the fleece was dry, and there was dew all over the ground.
7 Then Jer·ub·baʹal, that is, Gidʹe·on, and all the people with him rose early and encamped at the Spring of Haʹrod, while the camp of Midʹi·an was north of him at the hill of Moʹreh in the valley plain. 2 Jehovah now said to Gidʹe·on: “There are too many people with you for me to give Midʹi·an into their hand. Otherwise, Israel might brag about itself against me and say, ‘My own hand saved me.’ 3 Now, please, announce in the presence of the people: ‘Whoever is afraid and trembling, let him return home.’” So Gidʹe·on put them to the test. With that, 22,000 of the people returned home, and 10,000 remained.4 Still Jehovah said to Gidʹe·on: “There are yet too many people. Have them go down to the water so that I may test them for you there. When I say to you, ‘This one will go with you,’ he will go with you, but when I say to you, ‘This one will not go along with you,’ he will not go along.” 5 So he took the people down to the water.Then Jehovah said to Gidʹe·on: “Separate everyone who laps up the water with his tongue just as a dog laps, from those who bend down on their knees to drink.” 6 The number of those lapping up the water, putting their hand to their mouth, was 300 men. The rest of the people bent down on their knees to drink.7 Jehovah now said to Gidʹe·on: “I will save you with the 300 men who lapped the water, and I will give Midʹi·an into your hand. But let all the other people go back home.” 8 So after they took the provisions and the horns from the people, he sent all the other men of Israel back home, and he kept only the 300 men. The camp of Midʹi·an was below him in the valley plain.9 During that night, Jehovah said to him: “Get up, attack the camp, for I have given it into your hand. 10 But if you are afraid to attack, go down to the camp with Puʹrah your attendant. 11 Listen to what they say, and afterward you will have the courage to attack the camp.” At that he and Puʹrah his attendant went down to the edge of the encamped army.12 Now Midʹi·an and Amʹa·lek and all the Easterners covered the valley plain like a swarm of locusts, and their camels were without number, as many as the grains of sand on the seashore. 13 Gidʹe·on now came, and there was a man relating a dream to his companion, and he said: “This is the dream I had. There was a round loaf of barley bread rolling into the camp of Midʹi·an. It came to a tent and struck it so hard that it collapsed. Yes, it turned the tent upside down, and the tent fell flat.” 14 At this his companion said: “This can only be the sword of Gidʹe·on the son of Joʹash, a man of Israel. God has given Midʹi·an and all the camp into his hand.”15 As soon as Gidʹe·on heard him relate the dream and its interpretation, he bowed down to worship. After that he returned to the camp of Israel and said: “Get up, for Jehovah has given the camp of Midʹi·an into your hand.” 16 Then he divided the 300 men into three bands and gave all of them horns and large empty jars with torches inside the jars. 17 Then he said to them: “Watch me and do exactly what I do. When I come to the edge of the camp, you should do just as I do. 18 When I blow the horn, I and all who are with me, you also must blow the horns all around the camp and shout, ‘For Jehovah and for Gidʹe·on!’”19 Gidʹe·on and the 100 men who were with him came to the edge of the camp at the start of the middle night watch, just after the sentries were posted. They blew the horns and smashed the large water jars that were in their hands. 20 So the three bands blew the horns and shattered the large jars. They held the torches in their left hands and blew the horns in their right hands and they called out: “The sword of Jehovah and of Gidʹe·on!” 21 All the while each man stood in his place all around the camp, and the whole army ran away, shouting as they fled. 22 The 300 continued to blow the horns, and Jehovah turned the sword of each one against the other throughout the camp; and the army fled as far as Beth-shitʹtah, on to Zerʹe·rah, as far as the outskirts of Aʹbel-me·hoʹlah by Tabʹbath.23 And the men of Israel were called together from Naphʹta·li, Ashʹer, and all of Ma·nasʹseh, and they chased after Midʹi·an. 24 Gidʹe·on sent messengers into all the mountainous region of Eʹphra·im, saying: “Go down to attack Midʹi·an, and capture the access to the waters as far as Beth-barʹah and the Jordan.” So all the men of Eʹphra·im were gathered together, and they captured the waters as far as Beth-barʹah and the Jordan. 25 They also captured the two princes of Midʹi·an, Oʹreb and Zeʹeb; they killed Oʹreb on the rock of Oʹreb, and they killed Zeʹeb at the winepress of Zeʹeb. They kept on pursuing Midʹi·an, and they brought the heads of Oʹreb and Zeʹeb to Gidʹe·on in the region of the Jordan.
8 Then the men of Eʹphra·im said to him: “What have you done to us? Why did you not call us when you went to fight against Midʹi·an?” And they quarreled bitterly with him. 2 But he said to them: “What have I done compared with you? Are not the gleanings of Eʹphra·im better than the grape harvest of Abi-eʹzer? 3 It was into your hand that God gave Midʹi·an’s princes Oʹreb and Zeʹeb, and what have I done compared with you?” When he spoke this way, they calmed down.4 Gidʹe·on then came to the Jordan and crossed it. He and the 300 men with him were tired, but they kept up the pursuit. 5 So he said to the men of Sucʹcoth: “Please give loaves of bread to the people following me, for they are tired and I am chasing after Zeʹbah and Zal·munʹna, the kings of Midʹi·an.” 6 But the princes of Sucʹcoth said: “Are the palms of Zeʹbah and Zal·munʹna already in your hand so that we should give bread to your army?” 7 At this Gidʹe·on said: “Just for that, when Jehovah gives Zeʹbah and Zal·munʹna into my hand, I will give you a thrashing with the thorns and the briars of the wilderness.” 8 And he went up from there to Pe·nuʹel and made the same request, but the men of Pe·nuʹel gave him the same answer as the men of Sucʹcoth. 9 So he said also to the men of Pe·nuʹel: “When I return in peace, I will pull down this tower.”10 Now Zeʹbah and Zal·munʹna were in Karʹkor with their armies, about 15,000 men. These were all who remained of the entire army of the Easterners, for 120,000 men armed with swords had fallen. 11 Gidʹe·on continued up by the way of the tent dwellers east of Noʹbah and Jogʹbe·hah and attacked the camp, which was off guard. 12 When Zeʹbah and Zal·munʹna fled, he pursued and captured the two Midʹi·an·ite kings, Zeʹbah and Zal·munʹna, throwing the whole camp into a panic.13 Gidʹe·on the son of Joʹash then returned from the war by way of the pass that goes up to Heʹres. 14 En route he captured and interrogated a young man from Sucʹcoth. So the young man wrote out for him the names of the princes and elders of Sucʹcoth, 77 men. 15 With that he went to the men of Sucʹcoth and said: “Here are Zeʹbah and Zal·munʹna about whom you taunted me, saying, ‘Are the palms of Zeʹbah and Zal·munʹna already in your hand so that we should give bread to your exhausted men?’” 16 Then he took the elders of the city and with thorns and briars of the wilderness, he taught the men of Sucʹcoth a lesson. 17 And he pulled down the tower of Pe·nuʹel and killed the men of the city.18 He asked Zeʹbah and Zal·munʹna: “What sort of men did you kill in Taʹbor?” To this they said: “They were like you, each one looked like the son of a king.” 19 At that he said: “They were my brothers, the sons of my mother. As surely as Jehovah lives, if you had spared their lives, I would not have to kill you.” 20 Then he said to Jeʹther his firstborn: “Get up, kill them.” But the young man did not draw his sword; he was afraid, for he was still a young man. 21 So Zeʹbah and Zal·munʹna said: “Get up yourself and slay us, for a man is judged by his mightiness.” So Gidʹe·on got up and killed Zeʹbah and Zal·munʹna and took the crescent-shaped ornaments that were on the necks of their camels.22 Later the men of Israel said to Gidʹe·on: “Rule over us, you and your son and your grandson as well, for you saved us out of the hand of Midʹi·an.” 23 But Gidʹe·on said to them: “I will not rule over you, nor will my son rule over you. Jehovah is the one who will rule over you.” 24 Gidʹe·on continued: “Let me make one request of you: that each of you give me a nose ring from his spoil.” (For they had gold nose rings because they were Ishʹma·el·ites.) 25 They replied: “We will surely give them.” With that they spread out a robe and each man threw a nose ring from his spoil on it. 26 The weight of the gold nose rings that he had requested amounted to 1,700 gold shekels, besides the crescent-shaped ornaments, the pendants, the purple wool garments worn by the kings of Midʹi·an, and the necklaces from the camels.27 Gidʹe·on made it into an ephʹod and exhibited it in his city Ophʹrah; and all Israel committed spiritual prostitution with it there, and it served as a snare to Gidʹe·on and to his household.28 Thus Midʹi·an was subdued before the Israelites, and they did not challenge them again; and the land had rest for 40 years in the days of Gidʹe·on.29 So Jer·ub·baʹal the son of Joʹash returned to his home and stayed there.30 Gidʹe·on became father to 70 sons, for he had many wives. 31 His concubine in Sheʹchem also bore him a son, and he named him A·bimʹe·lech. 32 And Gidʹe·on the son of Joʹash died at a good old age and was buried in the tomb of Joʹash his father in Ophʹrah of the Abi-ezʹrites.33 As soon as Gidʹe·on died, the Israelites again committed spiritual prostitution with the Baʹals, and they appointed Baʹal-beʹrith as their god. 34 The Israelites did not remember Jehovah their God, who had rescued them from the hand of all their enemies around them; 35 nor did they show loyal love toward the household of Jer·ub·baʹal, that is Gidʹe·on, in return for all the good that he had done for Israel.
9 In time A·bimʹe·lech the son of Jer·ub·baʹal went to his mother’s brothers in Sheʹchem, and he said to them and to all the family of his grandfather: 2 “Please ask all the leaders of Sheʹchem, ‘Which is better for you, for all 70 sons of Jer·ub·baʹal to rule over you or for one man to rule over you? And remember that I am your own bone and flesh.’”3 So his mother’s brothers said this in his behalf to all the leaders of Sheʹchem, and their hearts were inclined to follow A·bimʹe·lech, for they said: “He is our own brother.” 4 Then they gave him 70 pieces of silver from the house of Baʹal-beʹrith, and A·bimʹe·lech used it to hire idle and insolent men to accompany him. 5 After that he went to his father’s house at Ophʹrah and killed his brothers, the sons of Jer·ub·baʹal, 70 men, on one stone. The only survivor was Joʹtham, the youngest son of Jer·ub·baʹal, because he hid.6 Then all the leaders of Sheʹchem and all Beth-milʹlo gathered together and made A·bimʹe·lech king, close by the big tree, by the pillar that was in Sheʹchem.7 When they reported it to Joʹtham, he at once went and stood on the top of Mount Gerʹi·zim and called out in a loud voice to them: “Listen to me, you leaders of Sheʹchem, and then God will listen to you.8 “Once there were trees that went to anoint a king over them. So they said to the olive tree, ‘Rule over us.’ 9 But the olive tree said to them, ‘Must I give up my oil, which they use to glorify God and men, to go and wave over the other trees?’ 10 Then the trees said to the fig tree, ‘Come and rule over us.’ 11 But the fig tree said to them, ‘Must I give up my sweetness and my good fruitage to go and wave over the other trees?’ 12 Next the trees said to the vine, ‘Come and rule over us.’ 13 The vine replied to them, ‘Must I give up my new wine that makes God and men rejoice to go and wave over the trees?’ 14 Finally all the other trees said to the bramble, ‘Come and rule over us.’ 15 At this the bramble said to the trees, ‘If you are really anointing me as king over you, come and seek refuge under my shadow. But if not, let fire come out of the bramble and consume the cedars of Lebʹa·non.’16 “Now have you acted sincerely and honorably in making A·bimʹe·lech king, and have you shown goodness toward Jer·ub·baʹal and his household, and have you treated him as he deserves? 17 When my father fought for you, he risked his life to save you from Midʹi·an’s hand. 18 But today you have risen up against my father’s household and killed his sons, 70 men, on one stone. Then you made A·bimʹe·lech, the son of his slave girl, king over the leaders of Sheʹchem just because he is your brother. 19 Yes, if you are acting sincerely and honorably toward Jer·ub·baʹal and his household this day, rejoice over A·bimʹe·lech and let him also rejoice over you. 20 But if not, may fire come out of A·bimʹe·lech and consume the leaders of Sheʹchem and Beth-milʹlo, and may fire come out of the leaders of Sheʹchem and Beth-milʹlo and consume A·bimʹe·lech.”21 Then Joʹtham fled and escaped to Beʹer, and he lived there because of his brother A·bimʹe·lech.22 A·bimʹe·lech ruled over Israel for three years. 23 Then God let hostility develop between A·bimʹe·lech and the leaders of Sheʹchem, and they dealt treacherously with A·bimʹe·lech. 24 This was so that the violence done to the 70 sons of Jer·ub·baʹal might be avenged, so as to place responsibility for their blood on their brother A·bimʹe·lech for killing them and on the leaders of Sheʹchem for helping him to kill his brothers. 25 So the leaders of Sheʹchem set men to ambush him on the mountaintops, and they would rob everyone who passed by them on the road. In time it was reported to A·bimʹe·lech.26 Then Gaʹal son of Eʹbed and his brothers crossed over into Sheʹchem, and the leaders of Sheʹchem put their trust in him. 27 They went out into the field and gathered the grapes of their vineyards, trod them out, and held a festival, after which they went into the house of their god and ate and drank and cursed A·bimʹe·lech. 28 Then Gaʹal the son of Eʹbed said: “Who is A·bimʹe·lech, and who is Sheʹchem that we should serve him? Is he not the son of Jer·ub·baʹal, and is not Zeʹbul his commissioner? Serve the men of Haʹmor, Sheʹchem’s father! But why should we serve him? 29 If only this people were under my command, I would depose A·bimʹe·lech.” Then he said to A·bimʹe·lech: “Increase your army and come out.”30 When Zeʹbul the prince of the city heard the words of Gaʹal the son of Eʹbed, his anger blazed. 31 So he secretly sent messengers to A·bimʹe·lech, saying: “Look! Gaʹal the son of Eʹbed and his brothers are now in Sheʹchem, and here they are inciting the city against you. 32 Now come up by night, you and your men, and lie in wait in the field. 33 As soon as the sun rises in the morning, you should get up early and attack the city; and when he and his men come out against you, do whatever you can to defeat him.”34 So A·bimʹe·lech and all the people with him rose up by night, and in four bands they lay in wait against Sheʹchem. 35 When Gaʹal the son of Eʹbed went out and stood at the entrance of the city gate, A·bimʹe·lech and the people with him rose up from the ambush. 36 When Gaʹal saw the people, he said to Zeʹbul: “Look! There are people coming down from the mountaintops.” But Zeʹbul said to him: “You are seeing the shadows of the mountains as if they were men.”37 Gaʹal later said: “Look! People are coming down from the center of the land, and one band is coming by the way of the big tree of Me·onʹe·nim.” 38 Zeʹbul replied to him: “Where now is your boast, ‘Who is A·bimʹe·lech that we should serve him?’ Are these not the people you rejected? Go out now and fight against them.”39 So Gaʹal went out at the head of the leaders of Sheʹchem and fought against A·bimʹe·lech. 40 A·bimʹe·lech pursued him, and Gaʹal fled from him, and many fell slain as far as the entrance of the city gate.41 And A·bimʹe·lech continued to dwell in A·ruʹmah, and Zeʹbul drove Gaʹal and his brothers out of Sheʹchem. 42 The next day the people went out into the field, and A·bimʹe·lech was told about it. 43 So he took the people and divided them into three bands and lay in wait in the field. When he saw the people going out of the city, he attacked them and struck them down. 44 A·bimʹe·lech and the bands with him charged forward and took a position at the entrance of the city gate, while two bands attacked all who were in the field, and they struck them down. 45 A·bimʹe·lech fought against the city all that day and captured it. He killed the people in it, and then he pulled the city down and sowed it with salt.46 When all the leaders of the tower of Sheʹchem heard about this, they immediately went to the vault of the house of El-beʹrith. 47 As soon as it was reported to A·bimʹe·lech that all the leaders of the tower of Sheʹchem had gathered together, 48 A·bimʹe·lech and all the men with him went up Mount Zalʹmon. A·bimʹe·lech took an ax in his hand and cut off a tree branch and lifted it on his shoulder and said to the people with him: “What you saw me do, hurry and do the same!” 49 So all the people also cut off branches and followed A·bimʹe·lech. Then they put the branches against the vault and set the vault on fire. So all the people of the tower of Sheʹchem also died, about 1,000 men and women.50 A·bimʹe·lech then went to Theʹbez; he camped against Theʹbez and captured it. 51 There was a strong tower in the middle of the city, and all the men and women and all the city leaders fled there. They shut themselves in and climbed onto the roof of the tower. 52 A·bimʹe·lech made his way to the tower and attacked it. He approached the entrance of the tower to set it on fire. 53 Then one of the women dropped an upper millstone on A·bimʹe·lech’s head and crushed his skull. 54 He quickly called the attendant bearing his weapons and said to him: “Draw your sword and put me to death, so that they may not say about me, ‘A woman killed him.’” So his attendant ran him through, and he died.55 When the men of Israel saw that A·bimʹe·lech was dead, they all went back home. 56 Thus God repaid A·bimʹe·lech for the evil that he had done to his father by killing his 70 brothers. 57 God also made all the evil of the men of Sheʹchem come back on their own heads. So the curse of Joʹtham the son of Jer·ub·baʹal came upon them.
1 After the death of Joshua, the Israelites inquired of Jehovah: “Who of us will go up first to fight against the Caʹnaan·ites?” 2 Jehovah replied: “Judah will go up. Look! I am giving the land into his hand.” 3 Then Judah said to his brother Simʹe·on: “Come up with me into my assigned territory to fight against the Caʹnaan·ites. Then I will go with you into your assigned territory.” So Simʹe·on went with him.4 When Judah went up, Jehovah gave the Caʹnaan·ites and the Perʹiz·zites into their hands, and they defeated 10,000 men in Beʹzek. 5 They found A·doʹni-beʹzek in Beʹzek, and there they fought against him and defeated the Caʹnaan·ites and the Perʹiz·zites. 6 When A·doʹni-beʹzek fled, they chased him and caught him and cut off his thumbs and his big toes. 7 Then A·doʹni-beʹzek said: “There are 70 kings whose thumbs and big toes were cut off and who are picking up food under my table. Just as I have done, so God has repaid me.” After that they brought him to Jerusalem, and he died there.8 Furthermore, the men of Judah fought against Jerusalem and captured it; they struck it with the sword and set the city on fire. 9 Afterward, the men of Judah went down to fight against the Caʹnaan·ites inhabiting the mountainous region and the Negʹeb and the She·pheʹlah. 10 So Judah marched against the Caʹnaan·ites who were dwelling in Hebʹron (the name of Hebʹron was previously Kirʹi·ath-arʹba), and they struck down Sheʹshai, A·hiʹman, and Talʹmai.11 They marched from there against the inhabitants of Deʹbir. (The name of Deʹbir was previously Kirʹi·ath-seʹpher.) 12 Then Caʹleb said: “To the man who strikes Kirʹi·ath-seʹpher and captures it, I will give my daughter Achʹsah as a wife.” 13 And Othʹni·el the son of Keʹnaz, Caʹleb’s younger brother, captured it. So he gave him his daughter Achʹsah as a wife. 14 While she was going home, she urged him to ask her father for a field. Then she dismounted from her donkey. Caʹleb asked her: “What do you want?” 15 She said to him: “Please grant me a blessing, for you have given me a piece of land in the south; give me also Gulʹloth-maʹim.” So Caʹleb gave her Upper Gulʹloth and Lower Gulʹloth.16 And the descendants of the Kenʹite, Moses’ father-in-law, came up from the city of palm trees with the people of Judah to the wilderness of Judah south of Aʹrad. They went there and settled among the people. 17 But Judah marched on with his brother Simʹe·on, and they attacked the Caʹnaan·ites inhabiting Zeʹphath and devoted it to destruction. So they named the city Horʹmah. 18 Then Judah captured Gazʹa and its territory, Ashʹke·lon and its territory, and Ekʹron and its territory. 19 Jehovah was with Judah, and they took possession of the mountainous region, but they could not drive out the inhabitants of the plain, because they had war chariots with iron scythes. 20 They gave Hebʹron to Caʹleb, just as Moses had promised, and he drove out from there the three sons of Aʹnak.21 But the Benʹja·min·ites did not drive out the Jebʹu·sites inhabiting Jerusalem, so the Jebʹu·sites continue dwelling with the Benʹja·min·ites in Jerusalem down to this day.22 Meantime, the house of Joseph went up against Bethʹel, and Jehovah was with them. 23 The house of Joseph was spying on Bethʹel (incidentally, the name of the city was previously Luz), 24 and the spies saw a man going out of the city. So they said to him: “Show us, please, the way into the city, and we will treat you kindly.” 25 So the man showed them the way into the city, and they struck the city with the sword, but they let the man and all his family go free. 26 The man went to the land of the Hitʹtites and built a city and named it Luz, which is its name to this day.27 Ma·nasʹseh did not take possession of Beth-sheʹan and its dependent towns, Taʹa·nach and its dependent towns, the inhabitants of Dor and its dependent towns, the inhabitants of Ibʹle·am and its dependent towns, and the inhabitants of Me·gidʹdo and its dependent towns. The Caʹnaan·ites persisted in dwelling in this land. 28 When Israel grew stronger, they subjected the Caʹnaan·ites to forced labor, but they did not drive them out completely.29 Nor did Eʹphra·im drive out the Caʹnaan·ites who were dwelling in Geʹzer. The Caʹnaan·ites continued to dwell among them in Geʹzer.30 Zebʹu·lun did not drive out the inhabitants of Kitʹron and the inhabitants of Naʹha·lol. The Caʹnaan·ites continued to dwell among them and were subjected to forced labor.31 Ashʹer did not drive out the inhabitants of Acʹco and the inhabitants of Siʹdon, Ahʹlab, Achʹzib, Helʹbah, Aʹphik, and Reʹhob. 32 So the Ashʹer·ites continued to dwell among the Caʹnaan·ites inhabiting the land, because they did not drive them out.33 Naphʹta·li did not drive out the inhabitants of Beth-sheʹmesh and the inhabitants of Beth-aʹnath, but they continued to dwell among the Caʹnaan·ites inhabiting the land. The inhabitants of Beth-sheʹmesh and Beth-aʹnath became forced laborers for them.34 The Amʹor·ites confined the Danʹites to the mountainous region, for they would not let them come down into the plain. 35 So the Amʹor·ites persisted in dwelling in Mount Heʹres, Aiʹja·lon, and Sha·alʹbim. But when the power of the house of Joseph increased, they were forced into hard labor. 36 The territory of the Amʹor·ites was from the ascent of A·krabʹbim, from Seʹla upward.
2 Now Na·oʹmi had a relative on her husband’s side who was very wealthy; his name was Boʹaz, and he was of the family of E·limʹe·lech.2 Ruth the Moʹab·i·tess said to Na·oʹmi: “Let me go out, please, to the fields and glean among the ears of grain behind whoever looks on me with favor.” So Na·oʹmi said to her: “Go, my daughter.” 3 At that she went out and began to glean in the field behind the harvesters. By chance she came upon a plot of land belonging to Boʹaz, who was of the family of E·limʹe·lech. 4 Just then Boʹaz arrived from Bethʹle·hem and said to the harvesters: “Jehovah be with you.” And they replied: “Jehovah bless you.”5 Boʹaz then asked the young man in charge of the harvesters: “To whom does this young woman belong?” 6 The young man in charge of the harvesters answered: “The young woman is a Moʹab·i·tess who returned with Na·oʹmi from the fields of Moʹab. 7 She asked, ‘Please, may I glean and gather among the cut-off ears of grain left behind by the harvesters?’ And she has been on her feet since she came this morning until just now, when she sat in the shelter for a short rest.”8 Then Boʹaz said to Ruth: “Listen, my daughter. Do not go away to glean in another field, and do not go anywhere else; stay close by my young women. 9 Keep your eyes on the field that they harvest, and go with them. I have commanded the young men not to touch you. When you are thirsty, go to the water jars and drink from what the young men have drawn.”10 At that she fell facedown and bowed down to the ground and said to him: “How have I found favor in your eyes, and why have you taken notice of me, when I am a foreigner?” 11 Boʹaz answered her: “A full report was made to me of all you have done for your mother-in-law after the death of your husband and how you left your father and your mother and the land of your relatives to go to a people whom you had not known before. 12 May Jehovah reward you for what you have done, and may there be a perfect wage for you from Jehovah the God of Israel, under whose wings you have come to seek refuge.” 13 To this she said: “Let me find favor in your eyes, my lord, because you have comforted me and spoken reassuringly to your servant, although I am not even one of your servants.”14 Boʹaz said to her at mealtime: “Come here, eat some of the bread, and dip your piece in the vinegar.” So she sat down beside the harvesters. He then handed her some roasted grain, and she ate and was satisfied, and she had something left over. 15 When she got up to glean, Boʹaz commanded his young men: “Let her glean even among the cut-off ears of grain, and do not mistreat her. 16 You should also be sure to pull out some ears of grain from the bundles for her and leave them behind for her to glean, and do not say anything to stop her.”17 So she continued to glean in the field until evening. When she beat out what she had gleaned, it came to about an eʹphah of barley. 18 Then she took it and went into the city, and her mother-in-law saw what she had gleaned. Ruth also took out and gave to her the food that was left over after she had eaten her fill.19 Her mother-in-law then said to her: “Where did you glean today? Where did you work? May the one who took notice of you be blessed.” So she told her mother-in-law about whom she had worked with, saying: “The name of the man I worked with today is Boʹaz.” 20 At that Na·oʹmi said to her daughter-in-law: “May he be blessed by Jehovah, who has not failed in his loyal love toward the living and the dead.” Na·oʹmi continued: “The man is related to us. He is one of our repurchasers.” 21 Then Ruth the Moʹab·i·tess said: “He also told me, ‘Stay close by my young people until they have finished my entire harvest.’” 22 Na·oʹmi said to her daughter-in-law Ruth: “It is better, my daughter, for you to go out with his young women than to be harassed in another field.”23 So she stayed close to the young women of Boʹaz and gleaned until the barley harvest and the wheat harvest came to an end. And she kept dwelling with her mother-in-law.
3 Na·oʹmi, her mother-in-law, now said to her: “My daughter, should I not look for a home for you, so that it may go well with you? 2 Is not Boʹaz our relative? He is the one whose young women you were with. Tonight he is winnowing barley at the threshing floor. 3 So wash yourself and rub on some perfumed oil; then dress up and go down to the threshing floor. Do not make your presence known to the man until he has finished eating and drinking. 4 When he lies down, take note of the place where he lies down; then go and uncover his feet and lie down. He will tell you what you should do.”5 At that she replied: “All that you say to me I will do.” 6 So she went down to the threshing floor and did all that her mother-in-law had instructed her to do. 7 Meanwhile, Boʹaz ate and drank and was feeling good at heart. Then he went to lie down at the end of the grain heap. After that she quietly came and uncovered his feet and lay down. 8 At midnight the man began to shiver, and he leaned forward and saw a woman lying at his feet. 9 He said: “Who are you?” She replied: “I am Ruth, your servant. Spread out your garment over your servant, for you are a repurchaser.” 10 At that he said: “May Jehovah bless you, my daughter. You have shown your loyal love more in this last instance than in the first instance, by not going after the young men, whether poor or rich. 11 And now, my daughter, have no fear. I will do for you everything that you say, for everyone in the city knows that you are an excellent woman. 12 While it is true that I am a repurchaser, there is a repurchaser more closely related than I am. 13 Stay here tonight, and if he will repurchase you in the morning, fine! Let him repurchase you. But if he does not want to repurchase you, I will then repurchase you myself, as surely as Jehovah lives. Lie down here until the morning.”14 So she lay at his feet until the morning and then got up before it was light enough for anyone to be recognized. He then said: “Do not let it be known that a woman came to the threshing floor.” 15 He also said: “Bring the cloak that you are wearing, and hold it out.” So she held it out, and he put six measures of barley in it and put it on her, after which he went into the city.16 She went her way to her mother-in-law, who now said: “How did it go for you, my daughter?” She told her everything that the man had done for her. 17 She added: “He gave me these six measures of barley and said to me, ‘Do not go empty-handed to your mother-in-law.’” 18 At that she said: “Sit here, my daughter, until you learn how the matter will turn out, for the man will not rest until he settles the matter today.”
4 Now Boʹaz went up to the city gate and sat there. And look! the repurchaser whom Boʹaz had mentioned passed by. At that Boʹaz said: “Come here and sit down, So-and-so.” And he went over and sat down. 2 Then Boʹaz took ten of the city elders and said: “Sit down here.” So they sat down.3 Boʹaz now said to the repurchaser: “Na·oʹmi, who has returned from the fields of Moʹab, must sell the plot of land that belonged to our brother E·limʹe·lech. 4 So I thought I should disclose it to you and say, ‘Buy it in front of the inhabitants and the elders of my people. If you will repurchase it, repurchase it. But if you will not repurchase it, tell me so that I will know, for you have the claim to repurchase it, and I am next in line after you.’” He replied: “I am willing to repurchase it.” 5 Then Boʹaz said: “On the day you buy the field from Na·oʹmi, you must also buy it from Ruth the Moʹab·i·tess, the wife of the dead man, in order to restore the name of the dead man to his inheritance.” 6 To this the repurchaser said: “I am unable to repurchase it, for I may ruin my own inheritance. Repurchase it for yourself with my right of repurchase, because I am not able to repurchase it.”7 Now this was the custom of former times in Israel concerning the right of repurchase and exchange to validate every sort of transaction: A man had to remove his sandal and give it to the other party, and this was the manner of confirming an agreement in Israel. 8 So when the repurchaser said to Boʹaz, “Buy it for yourself,” he removed his sandal. 9 Then Boʹaz said to the elders and all the people: “You are witnesses today that I am buying from Na·oʹmi all that belonged to E·limʹe·lech and all that belonged to Chilʹi·on and Mahʹlon. 10 I am also acquiring Ruth the Moʹab·i·tess, the wife of Mahʹlon, as a wife to restore the name of the dead man to his inheritance, so that the name of the dead man will not be cut off from among his brothers and from the city gate of his home. You are witnesses today.”11 At this all the people who were in the city gate and the elders said: “We are witnesses! May Jehovah grant the wife who is entering your house to be like Rachel and like Leʹah, both of whom built the house of Israel. May you prosper in Ephʹra·thah and make a good name in Bethʹle·hem. 12 May your house become like the house of Peʹrez, whom Taʹmar bore to Judah, through the offspring that Jehovah will give you by this young woman.”13 So Boʹaz took Ruth and she became his wife. He had relations with her, and Jehovah let her conceive and she gave birth to a son. 14 Then the women said to Na·oʹmi: “Praised be Jehovah, who has not left you without a repurchaser today. May his name be proclaimed in Israel! 15 He has restored your life and will sustain you in your old age, because he has been born to your daughter-in-law, who loves you and is better to you than seven sons.” 16 Na·oʹmi took the child and held him to her bosom, and she cared for him. 17 Then the neighbor women gave him a name. They said, “A son has been born to Na·oʹmi,” and they named him Oʹbed. He is the father of Jesʹse, David’s father.18 Now this is the family line of Peʹrez: Peʹrez became father to Hezʹron; 19 Hezʹron became father to Ram; Ram became father to Am·minʹa·dab; 20 Am·minʹa·dab became father to Nahʹshon; Nahʹshon became father to Salʹmon; 21 Salʹmon became father to Boʹaz; Boʹaz became father to Oʹbed; 22 Oʹbed became father to Jesʹse; and Jesʹse became father to David.
1 Now in the days when the judges administered justice, a famine occurred in the land; and a man went from Bethʹle·hem in Judah to reside as a foreigner in the fields of Moʹab, he along with his wife and his two sons. 2 The man’s name was E·limʹe·lech, his wife’s name was Na·oʹmi, and the names of his two sons were Mahʹlon and Chilʹi·on. They were Ephʹrath·ites from Bethʹle·hem in Judah. And they came to the fields of Moʹab and remained there.3 After some time E·limʹe·lech, Na·oʹmi’s husband, died, and she was left with her two sons. 4 The men later married Moʹab·ite women; one was named Orʹpah, and the other was named Ruth. They remained there for about ten years. 5 Then the two sons, Mahʹlon and Chilʹi·on, also died, and the woman was left without her two children and her husband. 6 So she started out with her daughters-in-law to return from the fields of Moʹab, for she had heard in Moʹab that Jehovah had turned his attention to his people by giving them food.7 She left the place where she had been living with both of her daughters-in-law. As they were walking on the road to return to the land of Judah, 8 Na·oʹmi said to both of her daughters-in-law: “Go, return, each of you to your mother’s home. May Jehovah show loyal love to you, just as you have shown it to the men who have died and to me. 9 May Jehovah grant that each of you finds security in the home of your husband.” Then she kissed them, and they wept loudly. 10 They kept saying to her: “No, but we will go with you to your people.” 11 But Na·oʹmi said: “Return, my daughters. Why should you go with me? Can I still give birth to sons who could become your husbands? 12 Return, my daughters. Go, for I have grown too old to marry. Even if I could hope to find a husband tonight and could also bear sons, 13 would you keep waiting for them until they could grow up? Would you refrain from getting remarried for their sakes? No, my daughters, I feel very bitter for you, because the hand of Jehovah has turned against me.”14 Again they wept loudly, after which Orʹpah kissed her mother-in-law and departed. But Ruth stuck with her. 15 So Na·oʹmi said: “Look! Your widowed sister-in-law has returned to her people and her gods. Return with your sister-in-law.”16 But Ruth said: “Do not plead with me to abandon you, to turn back from accompanying you; for where you go I will go, and where you spend the night, I will spend the night. Your people will be my people, and your God my God. 17 Where you die I will die, and there I will be buried. May Jehovah do so to me and add to it if anything but death should separate me from you.”18 When Na·oʹmi saw that Ruth insisted on going with her, she stopped trying to convince her. 19 And they both continued on their way until they came to Bethʹle·hem. As soon as they arrived in Bethʹle·hem, the whole city became stirred up over them, and women were saying: “Is this Na·oʹmi?” 20 She would say to the women: “Do not call me Na·oʹmi. Call me Maʹra, for the Almighty has made life very bitter for me. 21 I was full when I went, but Jehovah made me return empty-handed. Why should you call me Na·oʹmi, when it is Jehovah who opposed me and the Almighty who caused me calamity?”22 This is how Na·oʹmi returned from the fields of Moʹab, along with her Moʹab·ite daughter-in-law Ruth. They came to Bethʹle·hem at the beginning of the barley harvest.
10 Samuel then took the flask of oil and poured it out on Saul’s head. He kissed him and said: “Has not Jehovah anointed you as a leader over his inheritance? 2 When you leave me today, you will find two men near the tomb of Rachel in the territory of Benjamin at Zelʹzah, and they will say to you, ‘The donkeys that you went to look for have been found, but now your father has forgotten about the donkeys and is worried about you. He is saying: “What should I do about my son?”’ 3 Go on from there until you come to the big tree of Taʹbor, where you will meet three men going up to the true God at Bethʹel, one carrying three young goats, one carrying three loaves of bread, and one carrying a large jar of wine. 4 They will ask about your welfare and give you two loaves, and you must accept the loaves from them. 5 After that you will come to the hill of the true God, where there is a garrison of the Phi·lisʹtines. When you come to the city, you will meet a group of prophets coming down from the high place, and a stringed instrument and tambourine and flute and harp will be played ahead of them while they are prophesying. 6 The spirit of Jehovah will empower you, and you will prophesy along with them and be changed into a different person. 7 When these signs have taken place, do whatever your hand finds possible, because the true God is with you. 8 Then go down ahead of me to Gilʹgal, and I will go down to you there to offer up burnt sacrifices and communion sacrifices. You should wait for seven days until I come to you. Then I will let you know what you should do.”9 As soon as Saul turned around to leave Samuel, God began changing his heart to be like that of someone else, and all these signs came true on that day. 10 So they went from there to the hill, and a group of prophets met him. At once the spirit of God empowered him, and he began to prophesy among them. 11 When all those who previously knew him saw him prophesying with the prophets, they said to one another: “What has happened to the son of Kish? Is Saul also among the prophets?” 12 Then a man from there said: “But who is their father?” So it became a saying: “Is Saul also among the prophets?”13 When he finished prophesying, he came to the high place. 14 The brother of Saul’s father later said to him and to his attendant: “Where did you go?” At that he said: “To look for the donkeys, but we saw that they were not there, so we went to Samuel.” 15 Saul’s uncle asked: “Please tell me, what did Samuel say to you?” 16 Saul replied to his uncle: “He told us that the donkeys had already been found.” But Saul did not tell him what Samuel said about the matter of the kingship.17 Samuel then called the people together to Jehovah at Mizʹpah 18 and said to the Israelites: “This is what Jehovah the God of Israel says: ‘It was I who brought Israel up out of Egypt and who rescued you from the hand of Egypt and from the hand of all the kingdoms that were oppressing you. 19 But today you have rejected your God who was your Savior out of all your evils and distresses, and you said: “No, you should appoint a king over us.” Now take your stand before Jehovah by your tribes and by your thousands.’”20 So Samuel had all the tribes of Israel draw near, and the tribe of Benjamin was selected. 21 Then he had the tribe of Benjamin draw near by its families, and the family of the Matʹrites was selected. Finally Saul the son of Kish was selected. But when they went to look for him, he was nowhere to be found. 22 So they inquired of Jehovah: “Has the man come here yet?” Jehovah answered: “There he is hiding himself among the luggage.” 23 So they ran and brought him from there. When he stood in the middle of the people, he was head and shoulders taller than all the other people. 24 Samuel said to all the people: “Do you see the one whom Jehovah has chosen, that there is none like him among all the people?” And all the people began to shout: “Long live the king!”25 Samuel spoke to the people about the rightful due of kings and wrote it in a book and deposited it before Jehovah. Then Samuel sent all the people away, everyone to his house. 26 Saul also went to his home in Gibʹe·ah, accompanied by the warriors whose hearts Jehovah had touched. 27 But some worthless men said: “How will this one save us?” So they despised him, and they did not bring any gift to him. But he said nothing about it.
11 Then Naʹhash the Amʹmon·ite came up and camped against Jaʹbesh in Gilʹe·ad. All the men of Jaʹbesh said to Naʹhash: “Make a covenant with us, and we will serve you.” 2 Naʹhash the Amʹmon·ite said to them: “I will make it with you on this condition: that all your right eyes be bored out. I will do this to humiliate all Israel.” 3 The elders of Jaʹbesh replied to him: “Give us seven days’ time so that we can send messengers into all the territory of Israel. Then, if there is no one to rescue us, we will surrender to you.” 4 In time the messengers came to Gibʹe·ah of Saul and spoke these words in the hearing of the people, and all the people wept at the top of their voice.5 But Saul was coming from the field behind the herd, and Saul said: “What is the matter with the people? Why are they weeping?” So they related to him the words of the men of Jaʹbesh. 6 The spirit of God empowered Saul when he heard these words, and he burned with anger. 7 So he took a pair of bulls and cut them into pieces, and he sent these into all the territory of Israel by the hand of the messengers, who said: “Whoever does not follow Saul and Samuel should expect this to be done to his cattle!” And the fear of Jehovah fell upon the people, so that they came out with one accord. 8 Then he counted them in Beʹzek, and there were 300,000 Israelites and 30,000 men of Judah. 9 They now said to the messengers who had come: “This is what you should say to the men of Jaʹbesh in Gilʹe·ad, ‘Tomorrow when the sun gets hot, you will be saved.’” With that the messengers came and told the men of Jaʹbesh, and they were overjoyed. 10 So the men of Jaʹbesh said: “Tomorrow we will surrender to you, and you may do to us whatever seems good to you.”11 On the next day, Saul divided the people into three bands, and they made their way into the middle of the camp during the morning watch and struck down the Amʹmon·ites until the day grew hot. Those who survived were scattered, so that no two of them were left together. 12 Then the people said to Samuel: “Who was saying, ‘Is Saul to be king over us?’ Hand the men over, and we will put them to death.” 13 However, Saul said: “Not a man should be put to death on this day, for today Jehovah has rescued Israel.”14 Samuel later said to the people: “Come and let us go to Gilʹgal to reconfirm the kingship.” 15 So all the people went to Gilʹgal, and in Gilʹgal they made Saul king before Jehovah. Then they offered communion sacrifices there before Jehovah, and Saul and all the men of Israel celebrated with great joy.
12 Finally Samuel said to all Israel: “Here I have done all that you asked of me, and I appointed a king to reign over you. 2 Now here is the king who is leading you! As for me, I have grown old and gray, and my sons are here with you, and I have led you from my youth until this day. 3 Here I am. Testify against me before Jehovah and before his anointed one: Whose bull or whose donkey have I taken? Or whom have I defrauded or crushed? From whose hand have I accepted a bribe to make me look the other way? If I have, I will restore it to you.” 4 To this they said: “You have not defrauded us or crushed us or accepted anything at all from anyone’s hand.” 5 So he said to them: “Jehovah is a witness against you, and his anointed one is a witness this day that you have found nothing to accuse me of.” To this they said: “He is a witness.”6 So Samuel said to the people: “Jehovah, who used Moses and Aaron and who brought your forefathers up out of the land of Egypt, is a witness. 7 And now take your positions, and I will judge you before Jehovah in view of all the righteous acts that Jehovah has done for you and for your forefathers.8 “As soon as Jacob had come into Egypt and your forefathers began calling to Jehovah for help, Jehovah sent Moses and Aaron to lead your forefathers out of Egypt and to cause them to dwell in this place. 9 But they forgot Jehovah their God, and he sold them into the hand of Sisʹe·ra the chief of the army of Haʹzor and into the hand of the Phi·lisʹtines and into the hand of the king of Moʹab, and they fought against them. 10 And they called to Jehovah for help and said, ‘We have sinned, for we have left Jehovah to serve the Baʹals and the Ashʹto·reth images; now rescue us out of the hand of our enemies so that we may serve you.’ 11 Then Jehovah sent Jer·ub·baʹal and Beʹdan and Jephʹthah and Samuel and rescued you from the hand of the enemies all around you, so that you could live in security. 12 When you saw that Naʹhash, the king of the Amʹmon·ites, had come against you, you kept saying to me, ‘No, we are determined to have a king over us!’ even though Jehovah your God is your King. 13 Now here is the king whom you have chosen, the one you asked for. Look! Jehovah has appointed a king over you. 14 If you fear Jehovah and serve him and obey his voice and you do not rebel against the order of Jehovah, and both you and the king who reigns over you follow Jehovah your God, fine. 15 But if you do not obey the voice of Jehovah and you rebel against the order of Jehovah, the hand of Jehovah will be against you and your fathers. 16 Now take your positions and see this great thing that Jehovah is doing before your eyes. 17 Is it not the wheat harvest today? I will call on Jehovah to make it thunder and rain; then know and understand what an evil thing you have done in the eyes of Jehovah in asking for a king for yourselves.”18 At that Samuel called to Jehovah, and Jehovah made it thunder and rain on that day, so that all the people were greatly in fear of Jehovah and of Samuel. 19 And all the people said to Samuel: “Pray to Jehovah your God for your servants, as we do not want to die, for we have added to all our sins another evil by asking for a king.”20 So Samuel said to the people: “Do not be afraid. You have indeed done all this evil. Only do not turn away from following Jehovah, and serve Jehovah with all your heart. 21 Do not turn away to follow the empty things, which are of no benefit and cannot rescue, because they are empty. 22 For the sake of his great name, Jehovah will not abandon his people, for Jehovah has taken it upon himself to make you his people. 23 As for me, it is unthinkable for me to sin against Jehovah by ceasing to pray in your behalf, and I will continue to instruct you in the good and right way. 24 Only fear Jehovah, and serve him faithfully with all your heart, for see what great things he has done for you. 25 But if you flagrantly do what is bad, you will be swept away, both you and your king.”
13 Saul was . . . years old when he became king, and for two years he reigned over Israel. 2 Saul chose 3,000 men out of Israel; 2,000 of these were with Saul at Michʹmash and in the mountainous region of Bethʹel and 1,000 were with Jonʹa·than at Gibʹe·ah of Benjamin. He sent the rest of the people away, each one to his tent. 3 Then Jonʹa·than struck down the garrison of the Phi·lisʹtines that was in Geʹba, and the Phi·lisʹtines heard about it. And Saul had the horn blown throughout all the land, saying: “Let the Hebrews hear!” 4 All Israel heard the news: “Saul has struck down a garrison of the Phi·lisʹtines, and now Israel has become a stench among the Phi·lisʹtines.” So the people were summoned to follow Saul at Gilʹgal.5 The Phi·lisʹtines also gathered together to fight against Israel, with 30,000 war chariots and 6,000 horsemen and troops as numerous as the grains of sand on the seashore; and they went up and camped in Michʹmash to the east of Beth-aʹven. 6 And the men of Israel saw that they were in trouble, because they were hard-pressed; so the people hid in the caves, the hollows, the crags, the cellars, and the cisterns. 7 Some of the Hebrews even crossed the Jordan to the land of Gad and Gilʹe·ad. But Saul was still in Gilʹgal, and all the people following him were trembling. 8 He continued waiting for seven days until the designated time that Samuel had set, but Samuel did not come to Gilʹgal, and the people were scattering from him. 9 Finally Saul said: “Bring to me the burnt sacrifice and the communion sacrifices.” And he offered up the burnt sacrifice.10 But as soon as he had finished offering up the burnt sacrifice, Samuel arrived. So Saul went out to meet him and bless him. 11 Then Samuel said: “What have you done?” Saul replied: “I saw that the people were deserting me, and you did not come within the designated time, and the Phi·lisʹtines were gathering together at Michʹmash. 12 So I said to myself, ‘Now the Phi·lisʹtines will come down against me at Gilʹgal, and I have not sought the favor of Jehovah.’ So I felt obligated to offer up the burnt sacrifice.”13 At this Samuel said to Saul: “You have acted foolishly. You have not obeyed the commandment that Jehovah your God gave you. If you had, Jehovah would have made your kingdom firm over Israel forever. 14 But now your kingdom will not last. Jehovah will find a man agreeable to his heart, and Jehovah will commission him as a leader over his people, because you did not obey what Jehovah commanded you.”15 Then Samuel rose and went his way up from Gilʹgal to Gibʹe·ah of Benjamin, and Saul took the count of the people; those still with him were about 600 men. 16 Saul, his son Jonʹa·than, and the people still with them were dwelling in Geʹba of Benjamin, and the Phi·lisʹtines had encamped at Michʹmash. 17 And the raiding parties would go out from the camp of the Phi·lisʹtines in three bands. One band would turn toward the road to Ophʹrah, to the land of Shuʹal; 18 another band would turn toward the road of Beth-hoʹron; and the third band would turn toward the road leading to the boundary that overlooks the valley of Ze·boʹim, toward the wilderness.19 Now there was not a metalworker to be found in all the land of Israel, because the Phi·lisʹtines had said: “So that the Hebrews may not make a sword or a spear.” 20 And all the Israelites had to go down to the Phi·lisʹtines to get their plowshares, mattocks, axes, or sickles sharpened. 21 The price for sharpening was a pim for the plowshares, for the mattocks, for the three-toothed instruments, for the axes, and for fixing fast the oxgoad. 22 And on the day of battle, not a sword or a spear was found in the hand of any of the people who were with Saul and Jonʹa·than; only Saul and his son Jonʹa·than had weapons.23 Now a garrison of the Phi·lisʹtines had gone out to the ravine pass of Michʹmash.
14 One day Jonʹa·than the son of Saul said to the attendant carrying his weapons: “Come and let us cross over to the Phi·lisʹtine outpost on the other side.” But he did not tell his father. 2 Saul was staying on the outskirts of Gibʹe·ah under the pomegranate tree in Migʹron, and there were about 600 men with him. 3 (And A·hiʹjah the son of A·hiʹtub, the brother of Ichʹa·bod, the son of Phinʹe·has, the son of Eʹli, the priest of Jehovah in Shiʹloh, was carrying the ephʹod.) And the people did not know that Jonʹa·than had gone. 4 Now between the passages that Jonʹa·than was trying to cross over to reach the outpost of the Phi·lisʹtines, there was a toothlike crag on one side and a toothlike crag on the other side; the name of the one was Boʹzez, and the name of the other was Seʹneh. 5 The one crag was a pillar on the north facing Michʹmash, and the other was on the south facing Geʹba.6 So Jonʹa·than said to his armor-bearer: “Come and let us cross over to the outpost of these uncircumcised men. Perhaps Jehovah will act in our behalf, for nothing can hinder Jehovah from saving by many or by few.” 7 At this his armor-bearer said to him: “Do whatever your heart impels you to do. Turn wherever you wish, and I will follow you wherever your heart impels you.” 8 Then Jonʹa·than said: “We will cross over to those men and reveal our presence to them. 9 If they say to us, ‘Stand still until we come to you!’ we will stand where we are and not go up to them. 10 But if they say, ‘Come up against us!’ we will go up, because Jehovah will give them into our hand. This will be our sign.”11 Then both of them revealed their presence to the outpost of the Phi·lisʹtines. The Phi·lisʹtines said: “Look! The Hebrews are coming out from the holes where they have been hiding.” 12 So the men of the outpost said to Jonʹa·than and his armor-bearer: “Come up to us, and we will teach you a lesson!” At once Jonʹa·than said to his armor-bearer: “Follow me, for Jehovah will give them into the hand of Israel.” 13 And Jonʹa·than climbed up on his hands and feet, and his armor-bearer was behind him; and the Phi·lisʹtines began to fall before Jonʹa·than, and his armor-bearer was putting them to death behind him. 14 In the first attack that Jonʹa·than and his armor-bearer made, they struck down about 20 men within about half the plowing line in an acre of field.15 Then terror spread in the field camp and among all the people of the outpost, and even the raiding parties were terrified. The earth began quaking, and a terror from God ensued. 16 Saul’s watchmen in Gibʹe·ah of Benjamin saw that the turmoil was spreading in every direction.17 Saul said to the people with him: “Take a count, please, and see who has left us.” When they took the count, they saw that Jonʹa·than and his armor-bearer were not there. 18 Saul now said to A·hiʹjah: “Bring the Ark of the true God near!” (For the Ark of the true God was with the Israelites at that time.) 19 And while Saul was speaking to the priest, the turmoil in the camp of the Phi·lisʹtines was growing greater and greater. Then Saul said to the priest: “Stop what you are doing.” 20 So Saul and all the people with him assembled and went into the battle, where they found that the Phi·lisʹtines had turned their swords against one another, and the confusion was very great. 21 Also, the Hebrews who had previously sided with the Phi·lisʹtines and who had come up with them into the camp were going over to Israel under Saul and Jonʹa·than. 22 All the men of Israel who had hidden in the mountainous region of Eʹphra·im heard that the Phi·lisʹtines had fled, and they too joined in pursuing them in the battle. 23 So Jehovah saved Israel on that day, and the battle extended as far as Beth-aʹven.24 But the men of Israel were hard-pressed on that day, for Saul had put the people under this oath: “Cursed is the man who eats any food before the evening and until I have taken vengeance on my enemies!” So none of the people ate any food.25 And all the people came into the forest, and there was honey on the ground. 26 When the people came into the forest, they saw the honey dripping, but no one would put his hand to his mouth, because they feared the oath. 27 But Jonʹa·than had not heard his father put the people under an oath, so he stretched out the tip of the staff that was in his hand and dipped it into the honeycomb. When he drew his hand back to his mouth, his eyes brightened. 28 At this one of the people said: “Your father put the people under a strict oath, saying, ‘Cursed is the man who eats food today!’ That is why the people are so tired.” 29 However, Jonʹa·than said: “My father has brought great trouble on the land. Look at how my eyes brightened because I tasted this little bit of honey. 30 How much better if the people had eaten freely today from the spoil of their enemies that they found! For then the slaughter of the Phi·lisʹtines would have been even greater.”31 On that day they kept striking down the Phi·lisʹtines from Michʹmash to Aiʹja·lon, and the people became very tired. 32 So the people began rushing greedily at the spoil, and they took sheep and cattle and calves and slaughtered them on the ground, and they ate the meat along with the blood. 33 So it was reported to Saul: “Look! The people are sinning against Jehovah by eating meat with the blood.” At this he said: “You have acted faithlessly. Roll a large stone to me immediately.” 34 Saul then said: “Spread out among the people and say to them, ‘Each of you must bring his bull and his sheep and slaughter them here and then eat them. Do not sin against Jehovah by eating meat with the blood.’” So each of them brought his bull with him that night and slaughtered it there. 35 And Saul built an altar to Jehovah. This was the first altar he built to Jehovah.36 Saul later said: “Let us go down after the Phi·lisʹtines by night and plunder them until the morning light. We will not leave a single survivor.” To this they said: “Do whatever seems good in your eyes.” Then the priest said: “Let us approach the true God here.” 37 And Saul inquired of God: “Should I go down after the Phi·lisʹtines? Will you give them into the hand of Israel?” But God did not answer him on that day. 38 So Saul said: “Come here, all you chiefs of the people, and find out what sin has been committed today. 39 For as surely as Jehovah is alive, who rescued Israel, even if it turns out to be Jonʹa·than my son, he must die.” But none of the people would answer him. 40 Then he said to all Israel: “You will be on one side, and my son Jonʹa·than and I will be on the other side.” At this the people said to Saul: “Do whatever seems good in your eyes.”41 Saul then said to Jehovah: “O God of Israel, answer with the Thumʹmim!” Then Jonʹa·than and Saul were selected, and the people went free. 42 Saul now said: “Cast lots to decide between me and my son Jonʹa·than.” And Jonʹa·than was selected. 43 Then Saul said to Jonʹa·than: “Tell me, what have you done?” So Jonʹa·than told him: “I merely tasted a little honey on the tip of the staff in my hand. Here I am! I am ready to die!”44 At this Saul said: “Thus may God do and may he add to it if you do not die, Jonʹa·than.” 45 But the people said to Saul: “Should Jonʹa·than die—the one who brought this great victory to Israel? It is unthinkable! As surely as Jehovah is alive, not even a single hair of his head should fall to the ground, for it was with God that he acted this day.” With that the people rescued Jonʹa·than, and he did not die.46 So Saul stopped pursuing the Phi·lisʹtines, and the Phi·lisʹtines went to their own territory.47 Saul secured the kingship over Israel and fought against all his enemies on every side, against the Moʹab·ites, the Amʹmon·ites, the Eʹdom·ites, the kings of Zoʹbah, and the Phi·lisʹtines; and wherever he went he defeated them. 48 And he fought bravely and conquered the A·malʹek·ites and rescued Israel from the hand of their plunderers.49 The sons of Saul were Jonʹa·than, Ishʹvi, and Malʹchi-shuʹa. And he had two daughters; the name of the older one was Meʹrab, and the name of the younger one, Miʹchal. 50 The name of Saul’s wife was A·hinʹo·am the daughter of A·himʹa·az. The name of the chief of his army was Abʹner the son of Ner, the uncle of Saul. 51 Kish was the father of Saul, and Ner the father of Abʹner was the son of A·biʹel.52 There was fierce warfare with the Phi·lisʹtines all the days of Saul. When Saul saw any strong or courageous man, he would recruit him into his service.
15 Then Samuel said to Saul: “Jehovah sent me to anoint you as king over his people Israel; now listen to what Jehovah has to say. 2 This is what Jehovah of armies says: ‘I will call to account the A·malʹek·ites for what they did to Israel when they opposed them along their way coming up from Egypt. 3 Now go, and strike down the A·malʹek·ites, and devote them to destruction along with all that they have. You must not spare them; you are to put them to death, man as well as woman, child as well as infant, bull as well as sheep, camel as well as donkey.’” 4 Saul summoned the people and counted them in Te·laʹim: There were 200,000 foot soldiers and 10,000 men of Judah.5 Saul advanced as far as the city of Amʹa·lek and set an ambush by the valley. 6 Saul then said to the Kenʹites: “Go, depart from among the A·malʹek·ites, so that I do not sweep you away with them. For you showed loyal love to all the people of Israel at the time they came up out of Egypt.” So the Kenʹites departed from the midst of Amʹa·lek. 7 After that Saul struck down the A·malʹek·ites from Havʹi·lah as far as Shur, which is next to Egypt. 8 He caught Aʹgag the king of Amʹa·lek alive, but all the other people he devoted to destruction with the sword. 9 However, Saul and the people spared Aʹgag and the best of the flock, the herd, the fattened animals, the rams, and all that was good. They did not want to devote them to destruction. But all the goods that were worthless and unwanted, these they devoted to destruction.10 Then the word of Jehovah came to Samuel: 11 “I regret that I have made Saul king, for he has turned away from following me and he has not carried out my words.” Samuel became very upset, and he kept crying out to Jehovah all night long. 12 When Samuel got up early in the morning to meet Saul, Samuel was told: “Saul went to Carʹmel, and there he erected a monument for himself. Then he turned around and went down to Gilʹgal.” 13 When Samuel finally came to him, Saul said to him: “May Jehovah bless you. I have carried out the word of Jehovah.” 14 But Samuel said: “Then what is this sound of the flock in my ears and the sound of the cattle that I hear?” 15 To this Saul said: “They were brought from the A·malʹek·ites, because the people spared the best of the flock and the herd for sacrificing them to Jehovah your God; but what was left we devoted to destruction.” 16 At this Samuel said to Saul: “Stop! Let me tell you what Jehovah said to me last night.” So he said to him: “Speak!”17 Samuel continued: “Were you not insignificant in your own eyes when you were made head of the tribes of Israel and when Jehovah anointed you as king over Israel? 18 Jehovah later sent you on a mission and said, ‘Go, and devote the sinful A·malʹek·ites to destruction. Fight against them until you have exterminated them.’ 19 So why did you not obey the voice of Jehovah? Instead, you rushed greedily toward the spoil and did what was bad in the eyes of Jehovah!”20 However, Saul said to Samuel: “But I have obeyed the voice of Jehovah! I went on the mission to which Jehovah sent me, and I brought back Aʹgag the king of Amʹa·lek, and I devoted the A·malʹek·ites to destruction. 21 But the people took sheep and cattle from the spoil, the best of what was devoted to destruction, to sacrifice to Jehovah your God at Gilʹgal.”22 Samuel then said: “Does Jehovah take as much pleasure in burnt offerings and sacrifices as in obeying the voice of Jehovah? Look! To obey is better than a sacrifice, and to pay attention than the fat of rams; 23 for rebelliousness is the same as the sin of divination, and pushing ahead presumptuously the same as using magical power and idolatry. Because you have rejected the word of Jehovah, he has rejected you from being king.”24 Then Saul said to Samuel: “I have sinned, for I have overstepped the order of Jehovah and your words, because I feared the people and listened to what they said. 25 And now, please, pardon my sin, and return with me so that I may bow down to Jehovah.” 26 But Samuel said to Saul: “I will not return with you, for you have rejected the word of Jehovah, and Jehovah has rejected you from continuing as king over Israel.” 27 As Samuel was turning to go, Saul grabbed hold of the hem of his sleeveless coat, but it ripped away. 28 At this Samuel said to him: “Jehovah has ripped away the royal rule of Israel from you today, and he will give it to one of your fellow men who is better than you. 29 Moreover, the Excellency of Israel will not prove false or change his mind, for He is not a mere man that he should change his mind.”30 At this he said: “I have sinned. But honor me, please, in front of the elders of my people and in front of Israel. Return with me, and I will bow down to Jehovah your God.” 31 So Samuel returned behind Saul, and Saul bowed down to Jehovah. 32 And Samuel said: “Bring Aʹgag the king of Amʹa·lek near to me.” Then Aʹgag went to him reluctantly, for Aʹgag had been saying to himself: ‘Surely the threat of death is past.’ 33 However, Samuel said: “Just as your sword has bereaved women of children, so your mother will be most bereaved among women.” With that Samuel hacked Aʹgag to pieces before Jehovah at Gilʹgal.34 Samuel now went to Raʹmah, and Saul went up to his own house at Gibʹe·ah of Saul. 35 Samuel did not see Saul again until the day of his death, for Samuel went into mourning for Saul. And Jehovah regretted that he had made Saul king over Israel.
16 Jehovah eventually said to Samuel: “How long will you mourn for Saul now that I have rejected him from ruling as king over Israel? Fill your horn with oil and go. I will send you to Jesʹse the Bethʹle·hem·ite, because I have selected from among his sons a king for myself.” 2 But Samuel said: “How can I go? When Saul hears about it, he will kill me.” Jehovah replied: “Take a young cow with you and say, ‘I have come to sacrifice to Jehovah.’ 3 Invite Jesʹse to the sacrifice; then I will make known to you what to do. You must anoint for me the one whom I designate to you.”4 Samuel did what Jehovah said. When he came to Bethʹle·hem, the elders of the city were trembling at meeting him, and they said: “Does your coming mean peace?” 5 To this he said: “It means peace. I have come to sacrifice to Jehovah. Sanctify yourselves, and come with me to the sacrifice.” Then he sanctified Jesʹse and his sons, after which he summoned them to the sacrifice. 6 As they came in and he saw E·liʹab, he said: “Surely here before Jehovah stands his anointed one.” 7 But Jehovah said to Samuel: “Do not pay attention to his appearance and how tall he is, for I have rejected him. For the way man sees is not the way God sees, because mere man sees what appears to the eyes, but Jehovah sees into the heart.” 8 Then Jesʹse called A·binʹa·dab and had him pass before Samuel, but he said: “Jehovah has not chosen this one either.” 9 Next Jesʹse presented Shamʹmah, but he said: “Jehovah has not chosen this one either.” 10 So Jesʹse had seven of his sons pass before Samuel, but Samuel said to Jesʹse: “Jehovah has not chosen any of these.”11 Finally Samuel said to Jesʹse: “Are these all of your boys?” To this he said: “The youngest has been left out until now; he is pasturing the sheep.” Then Samuel said to Jesʹse: “Send for him, because we will not sit down for the meal until he comes here.” 12 So he sent for him and brought him in. Now he was ruddy, with beautiful eyes, and handsome in appearance. Then Jehovah said: “Get up, anoint him, for this is the one!” 13 So Samuel took the horn of oil and anointed him in the presence of his brothers. And the spirit of Jehovah began to empower David from that day forward. Samuel later rose and went his way to Raʹmah.14 Now the spirit of Jehovah had departed from Saul, and a bad spirit from Jehovah terrorized him. 15 The servants of Saul said to him: “You see that a bad spirit from God is terrorizing you. 16 Let our lord, please, command your servants before you to look for a man who is skilled at playing the harp. Whenever a bad spirit from God comes upon you, he will play it, and you will feel better.” 17 So Saul said to his servants: “Find me, please, a man who plays well, and bring him to me.”18 One of the attendants said: “Look! I have seen how a son of Jesʹse the Bethʹle·hem·ite plays skillfully, and he is a courageous, mighty warrior. He can speak well, and he is handsome, and Jehovah is with him.” 19 Saul then sent messengers to Jesʹse and said: “Send to me your son David, who is with the flock.” 20 So Jesʹse loaded a donkey with bread, a skin bottle of wine, and a young goat and sent them to Saul with his son David. 21 Thus David came to Saul and began serving him. Saul grew to love him very much, and he became his armor-bearer. 22 Saul sent a message to Jesʹse: “Please let David remain in my service, for he has found favor in my eyes.” 23 Whenever a bad spirit from God came upon Saul, David took the harp and played it, and Saul found relief and felt better, and the bad spirit would depart from him.
17 And the Phi·lisʹtines assembled their armies for war. They assembled at Soʹcoh, which belongs to Judah, and they camped between Soʹcoh and A·zeʹkah, in Eʹphes-damʹmim. 2 Saul and the men of Israel assembled and camped in the Valley of Eʹlah, and they drew up in battle formation to meet the Phi·lisʹtines. 3 The Phi·lisʹtines occupied the mountain on one side, and the Israelites occupied the mountain on the other side, with the valley between them.4 Then a champion came out from the camps of the Phi·lisʹtines; his name was Go·liʹath, from Gath, and his height was six cubits and a span. 5 He had a helmet of copper on his head, and he was wearing a coat of mail of overlapping scales. The weight of the copper coat of mail was 5,000 shekels. 6 He had shin guards of copper on his legs and a javelin of copper slung between his shoulders. 7 The wooden shaft of his spear was like the beam of loom workers, and the iron blade of his spear weighed 600 shekels; and his shield-bearer was marching ahead of him. 8 Then he stood and called out to the battle line of Israel and said to them: “Why have you come out to draw up in battle formation? Am I not the Phi·lisʹtine, and are you not the servants of Saul? Choose a man for yourselves, and let him come down to me. 9 If he is able to fight with me and strike me down, we will then become your servants. But if I prevail against him and strike him down, you will become our servants and serve us.” 10 The Phi·lisʹtine then said: “I do taunt the battle line of Israel this day. Give me a man, and let us fight it out!”11 When Saul and all Israel heard these words of the Phi·lisʹtine, they became terrified and greatly afraid.12 Now David was the son of the Ephʹrath·ite from Bethʹle·hem of Judah named Jesʹse, who had eight sons and who in the days of Saul was already an old man. 13 The three oldest sons of Jesʹse had followed Saul to the war. The names of his three sons who went to war were E·liʹab the firstborn, his second son A·binʹa·dab, and the third Shamʹmah. 14 David was the youngest, and the three oldest followed Saul.15 David was going back and forth from Saul to tend the sheep of his father at Bethʹle·hem. 16 Meanwhile, the Phi·lisʹtine would come forward and take his position each morning and each evening for 40 days.17 Then Jesʹse said to his son David: “Take, please, this eʹphah of roasted grain and these ten loaves of bread, and carry them quickly to your brothers in the camp. 18 And take these ten portions of cheese to the chief of the thousand; also, you should check on the welfare of your brothers and bring back some token from them.” 19 They were with Saul and all the other men of Israel in the Valley of Eʹlah, fighting against the Phi·lisʹtines.20 So David got up early in the morning and left someone in charge of the sheep; then he packed up and went just as Jesʹse had commanded him. When he came to the camp enclosure, the army was going out to the battle line, shouting a battle cry. 21 Israel and the Phi·lisʹtines drew up so that one battle line faced the other battle line. 22 David immediately left his baggage in the care of the baggage keeper and ran to the battle line. When he arrived, he began asking about the welfare of his brothers.23 While he was speaking with them, there came the champion named Go·liʹath, the Phi·lisʹtine from Gath. He came out from the battle line of the Phi·lisʹtines, and he spoke the same words as before, and David heard him. 24 When all the men of Israel saw the man, they fled from him, terrified. 25 The men of Israel were saying: “Have you seen this man who is coming out? He comes to taunt Israel. The king will give great riches to the man who strikes him down, he will give him his own daughter, and he will give the house of his father exemption in Israel.”26 David began to say to the men who were standing near him: “What will be done for the man who strikes down that Phi·lisʹtine over there and takes away reproach from Israel? For who is this uncircumcised Phi·lisʹtine that he should taunt the battle line of the living God?” 27 Then the people told him the same thing as before: “This is what will be done for the man who strikes him down.” 28 When his oldest brother E·liʹab heard him speak to the men, he became angry with David and said: “Why have you come down? And with whom did you leave those few sheep in the wilderness? I well know your presumptuousness and the bad intentions of your heart; you came down just to see the battle.” 29 To this David said: “What have I done now? I was only asking a question!” 30 So he turned from him toward someone else and asked the same thing as before, and the people gave him the same reply as before.31 The words that David had spoken were overheard and reported to Saul. So he sent for him. 32 David said to Saul: “Let no one lose heart because of him. Your servant will go and fight with this Phi·lisʹtine.” 33 But Saul said to David: “You are not able to go fight against this Phi·lisʹtine, for you are but a boy, and he has been a soldier from his youth.” 34 David then said to Saul: “Your servant became a shepherd of his father’s flock, and a lion came, also a bear, and each carried off a sheep from the flock. 35 I went out after it and struck it down and rescued it from its mouth. When it rose up against me, I grabbed it by its fur and struck it down and put it to death. 36 Your servant struck down both the lion and the bear, and this uncircumcised Phi·lisʹtine will become like one of them, for he has taunted the battle lines of the living God.” 37 Then David added: “Jehovah, who rescued me from the claws of the lion and the bear, he is the one who will rescue me from the hand of this Phi·lisʹtine.” At this Saul said to David: “Go, and may Jehovah be with you.”38 Saul now clothed David with his garments. He put a copper helmet on his head, after which he clothed him with a coat of mail. 39 Then David strapped on his sword over his garments and tried to go but could not, for he was not used to them. David said to Saul: “I am unable to go in these things, for I am not used to them.” So David took them off. 40 He then took his staff in his hand and chose five smooth stones from the streambed and placed them in the pouch of his shepherd’s bag, and his sling was in his hand. And he began approaching the Phi·lisʹtine.41 The Phi·lisʹtine came closer and closer to David, and his shield-bearer was ahead of him. 42 When the Phi·lisʹtine looked and saw David, he sneered at him in contempt because he was just a ruddy and handsome boy. 43 So the Phi·lisʹtine said to David: “Am I a dog, so that you are coming against me with sticks?” With that the Phi·lisʹtine cursed David by his gods. 44 The Phi·lisʹtine said to David: “Just come to me, and I will give your flesh to the birds of the heavens and to the beasts of the field.”45 David replied to the Phi·lisʹtine: “You are coming against me with sword and spear and javelin, but I am coming against you in the name of Jehovah of armies, the God of the battle line of Israel, whom you have taunted. 46 This very day Jehovah will surrender you into my hand, and I will strike you down and cut off your head; and on this day I will give the corpses of the camp of the Phi·lisʹtines to the birds of the heavens and to the wild beasts of the earth; and people of all the earth will know that there is a God in Israel. 47 And all those gathered here will know that it is not with the sword or the spear that Jehovah saves, for the battle belongs to Jehovah, and he will give all of you into our hand.”48 Then the Phi·lisʹtine rose and drew steadily closer to meet David, but David ran quickly toward the battle line to meet the Phi·lisʹtine. 49 David thrust his hand into his bag and took a stone from there and slung it. He struck the Phi·lisʹtine in the forehead, and the stone sank into his forehead and he fell facedown on the ground. 50 So David prevailed over the Phi·lisʹtine with a sling and a stone; he struck down the Phi·lisʹtine and put him to death, though there was no sword in David’s hand. 51 David continued running and stood over him. Then he took hold of the Phi·lisʹtine’s sword and pulled it out of its sheath and made sure that he was dead by cutting off his head with it. When the Phi·lisʹtines saw that their mighty one had died, they fled.52 At that the men of Israel and of Judah rose and broke into shouting and pursued the Phi·lisʹtines all the way from the valley to the gates of Ekʹron, and the slain of the Phi·lisʹtines lay fallen along the road from Shaʹa·raʹim, as far as Gath and Ekʹron. 53 After the Israelites returned from hotly pursuing the Phi·lisʹtines, they pillaged their camps.54 Then David took the head of the Phi·lisʹtine and brought it to Jerusalem, but he put the Phi·lisʹtine’s weapons in his own tent.55 At the moment that Saul saw David go out to meet the Phi·lisʹtine, he said to Abʹner, the chief of the army: “Whose son is this boy, Abʹner?” Abʹner replied: “As surely as you live, O king, I do not know!” 56 The king said: “Find out whose son the young man is.” 57 So as soon as David returned from striking down the Phi·lisʹtine, Abʹner took him and brought him before Saul with the head of the Phi·lisʹtine in his hand. 58 Saul now said to him: “Whose son are you, boy?” to which David said: “The son of your servant Jesʹse the Bethʹle·hem·ite.”
18 As soon as David had finished speaking to Saul, Jonʹa·than and David became bound together in close friendship, and Jonʹa·than began to love him as himself. 2 From that day, Saul kept David with him, and he did not allow him to return to his father’s house. 3 And Jonʹa·than and David made a covenant, because he loved him as himself. 4 Jonʹa·than took off the sleeveless coat that he wore and gave it to David, along with his gear, his sword, his bow, and his belt. 5 David began going out and was successful wherever Saul would send him. So Saul put him in charge of the fighting men, and this pleased all the people and the servants of Saul.6 When David and the others would return from striking down the Phi·lisʹtines, the women would come out from all the cities of Israel with song and dances to meet King Saul with tambourines, with rejoicing, and with lutes. 7 The women who were celebrating would sing:“Saul has struck down his thousands,And David his tens of thousands.”8 Saul became very angry, and this song displeased him, for he said: “They have credited David with tens of thousands, but to me they have credited thousands. The only thing left to give him is the kingship!” 9 From that day on, Saul was always looking at David suspiciously.10 The next day a bad spirit from God gripped Saul, and he started to act strangely inside the house, while David was playing music on the harp as on other occasions. Saul had a spear in his hand, 11 and he hurled the spear, saying to himself: ‘I will pin David to the wall!’ But David escaped from him twice. 12 Then Saul was afraid of David because Jehovah was with him but had departed from Saul. 13 So Saul removed him from his presence and appointed him as chief of a thousand, and David would lead the army into battle. 14 David continued to have success in all he did, and Jehovah was with him. 15 And when Saul saw that he was very successful, he became afraid of him. 16 But all Israel and Judah loved David, because he would lead them in their campaigns.17 Saul later said to David: “Here is my oldest daughter Meʹrab. I will give her to you as a wife. However, you should continue to display your courage for me and fight the wars of Jehovah.” For Saul said to himself: ‘Do not let my hand come against him. Let the hand of the Phi·lisʹtines strike him.’ 18 At this David said to Saul: “Who am I and who are my relatives, my father’s family in Israel, for me to become son-in-law to the king?” 19 However, when the time came to give Saul’s daughter Meʹrab to David, she had already been given to be the wife of Aʹdri·el the Me·holʹath·ite.20 Now Saul’s daughter Miʹchal was in love with David, and it was reported to Saul, and this pleased him. 21 So Saul said: “I will give her to him to serve as a snare to him, so that the hand of the Phi·lisʹtines may come upon him.” Saul then said to David a second time: “You will form a marriage alliance with me today.” 22 Further, Saul ordered his servants: “Speak to David secretly and say, ‘Look! The king is pleased with you, and all his servants are fond of you. So now form a marriage alliance with the king.’” 23 When Saul’s servants told David these things, David said: “Is it a trivial matter to you to form a marriage alliance with the king when I am a man poor and lightly esteemed?” 24 Then Saul’s servants reported to him: “These are the words that David spoke.”25 At that Saul said: “This is what you should say to David, ‘The king does not want any bride price except 100 foreskins of the Phi·lisʹtines, to take revenge on the enemies of the king.’” For Saul was scheming to have David fall by the hand of the Phi·lisʹtines. 26 So his servants reported these words to David, and it was pleasing to David to form a marriage alliance with the king. Before the allotted time, 27 David went with his men and struck down 200 Phi·lisʹtine men, and David brought the full number of their foreskins to the king, to form a marriage alliance with the king. Therefore, Saul gave him his daughter Miʹchal as a wife. 28 Saul realized that Jehovah was with David and that his daughter Miʹchal loved him. 29 This made Saul even more afraid of David, and Saul became an enemy of David for the rest of his life.30 The princes of the Phi·lisʹtines would go out to battle, but as often as they went out, David was more successful than all the servants of Saul; and his name was highly esteemed.
19 Saul later spoke to Jonʹa·than his son and to all his servants about putting David to death. 2 Since Saul’s son Jonʹa·than was very fond of David, Jonʹa·than told David: “My father Saul wants to have you put to death. Please be on your guard in the morning, and go to a secret place and remain hidden. 3 I will go out and stand next to my father in the field where you will be. I will talk about you to my father, and if I learn anything, I will be sure to tell you.”4 So Jonʹa·than spoke well of David to his father Saul. He said to him: “The king should not sin against his servant David, for he has not sinned against you and what he has done for you has benefited you. 5 He risked his life to strike down the Phi·lisʹtine, so that Jehovah brought about a great victory for all Israel. You saw it, and you were overjoyed. So why should you sin against innocent blood in having David put to death for no reason?” 6 Saul listened to Jonʹa·than, and Saul swore: “As surely as Jehovah is living, he will not be put to death.” 7 Afterward Jonʹa·than called David and told him all these things. So Jonʹa·than brought David to Saul, and he continued to serve him as before.8 In time war broke out again, and David went out and fought against the Phi·lisʹtines and struck them down with a great slaughter, and they fled from before him.9 And a bad spirit from Jehovah came upon Saul when he was sitting in his house with his spear in his hand, while David was playing music on the harp. 10 Saul tried to pin David to the wall with the spear, but he eluded Saul, who drove the spear into the wall. David fled and escaped during that night. 11 Saul later sent messengers to David’s house to watch it and to kill him in the morning, but David’s wife Miʹchal told him: “If you do not escape tonight, tomorrow you will be a dead man.” 12 Immediately Miʹchal let David down through the window, so that he could run away and escape. 13 Miʹchal took the teraphim statue and placed it on the bed, and she put a net of goat hair at the place of his head, and she covered it with a garment.14 Saul now sent messengers to take David, but she said: “He is sick.” 15 So Saul sent the messengers to see David and told them: “Bring him to me on his bed to have him put to death.” 16 When the messengers came in, there was the teraphim statue on the bed and a net of goat hair where his head would have been. 17 Saul said to Miʹchal: “Why did you trick me like this and send my enemy away so that he could escape?” Miʹchal replied to Saul: “He said to me, ‘Send me away, or I will kill you!’”18 Now David had run away and escaped, and he came to Samuel at Raʹmah. He told him all that Saul had done to him. Then he and Samuel went away, and they stayed in Naiʹoth. 19 In time it was reported to Saul: “Look! David is in Naiʹoth in Raʹmah.” 20 At once Saul sent messengers to seize David. When they saw the elderly ones of the prophets prophesying and Samuel standing and presiding over them, the spirit of God came to be upon Saul’s messengers, and they began behaving as prophets as well.21 When they told it to Saul, he immediately sent other messengers, and they too began behaving as prophets. So Saul sent messengers again, a third group, and they too began behaving as prophets. 22 Finally he also went to Raʹmah. When he reached the great cistern that is in Seʹcu, he asked: “Where are Samuel and David?” They replied: “There in Naiʹoth in Raʹmah.” 23 While Saul was on his way from there to Naiʹoth in Raʹmah, the spirit of God came upon him as well, and he walked along behaving as a prophet until he came into Naiʹoth in Raʹmah. 24 He also stripped off his garments, and he too behaved as a prophet before Samuel, and he lay there naked all that day and all that night. That is why they say: “Is Saul also among the prophets?”
2 Then Hanʹnah said in prayer:“My heart rejoices in Jehovah;My horn is exalted by Jehovah.My mouth is opened wide against my enemies,For I rejoice in your acts of salvation. 2 There is no one holy like Jehovah,There is no one but you,And there is no rock like our God. 3 Do not keep speaking with haughtiness;Let nothing arrogant come from your mouth,For Jehovah is a God of knowledge,And by him deeds are rightly evaluated. 4 The bows of mighty men are shattered,But those who are stumbling are given strength. 5 The well-fed must hire themselves out for bread,But the hungry hunger no more.The barren has given birth to seven,But she who had many sons has become desolate. 6 Jehovah kills, and he preserves life;He brings down to the Grave, and he raises up. 7 Jehovah impoverishes, and he enriches;He abases, and he exalts. 8 He raises the lowly one from the dust;He lifts up the poor from the ash heap,To make them sit with princes,Giving them a seat of honor.To Jehovah belong earth’s supports,And he places the productive land upon them. 9 He guards the steps of his loyal ones,But the wicked will be silenced in darkness,For not by power does a man prevail.10 Jehovah will shatter those fighting against him;He will thunder against them from the heavens.Jehovah will judge to the ends of the earth,He will give power to his kingAnd exalt the horn of his anointed one.”11 Then El·kaʹnah went to his house in Raʹmah, but the boy became a minister of Jehovah before Eʹli the priest.12 Now the sons of Eʹli were wicked men; they had no regard for Jehovah. 13 This is what they did with the due right of the priests from the people: Whenever any man was offering a sacrifice, an attendant of the priest came with a three-pronged fork in his hand when the meat was boiling, 14 and he would thrust it into the basin, the two-handled cooking pot, the cauldron, or the one-handled cooking pot. Whatever the fork brought up, the priest would take for himself. That is what they would do in Shiʹloh to all the Israelites coming there. 15 Also, even before the man sacrificing could make the fat smoke, an attendant of the priest would come and say to him: “Give the priest meat to roast. He will not take boiled meat from you, only raw meat.” 16 When the man would say to him: “Let them first be sure to make the fat smoke, then take for yourself whatever you desire,” he would say: “No, give it to me now; if not, I will take it by force!” 17 Thus the sin of the attendants came to be very great before Jehovah, for the men treated the offering of Jehovah with disrespect.18 Now Samuel was ministering before Jehovah, wearing a linen ephʹod, though he was just a boy. 19 Also, his mother would make for him a little sleeveless coat, and she brought it up to him year after year when she came up with her husband to offer the yearly sacrifice. 20 And Eʹli blessed El·kaʹnah and his wife and said: “May Jehovah grant you a child from this wife in place of the one who was lent to Jehovah.” And they went back home. 21 Jehovah turned his attention to Hanʹnah, so that she could conceive; and she gave birth to three more sons and two daughters. And the boy Samuel continued growing up before Jehovah.22 Now Eʹli was very old, but he had heard about everything that his sons were doing to all Israel and how they would lie down with the women who served at the entrance of the tent of meeting. 23 He used to say to them: “Why do you keep doing things like these? For the things I am hearing about you from all the people are bad. 24 No, my sons, the report that I hear circulating among the people of Jehovah is not good. 25 If a man should sin against another man, someone may appeal to Jehovah for him; but if a man should sin against Jehovah, who can pray for him?” But they refused to listen to their father, for Jehovah had determined to put them to death. 26 Meanwhile, the boy Samuel kept growing in stature and in favor both with Jehovah and with the people.27 A man of God came to Eʹli and said to him: “This is what Jehovah says: ‘Did I not plainly reveal myself to your father’s house while they were in Egypt as slaves to the house of Pharʹaoh? 28 And he was chosen out of all the tribes of Israel to serve as my priest and to go up on my altar to make sacrifices, to offer incense, and to bear an ephʹod before me; and I gave to the house of your forefather all the offerings made by fire of the Israelites. 29 Why do you men scorn my sacrifice and my offering that I have commanded in my place of dwelling? Why do you keep honoring your sons more than me by fattening yourselves from the best portions of every offering of my people Israel?30 “‘That is why the word of Jehovah the God of Israel is: “I did indeed say that your house and the house of your forefather would always walk before me.” But now Jehovah declares: “It is unthinkable, on my part, because those honoring me I will honor, but those despising me will be treated with contempt.” 31 Look! Days are coming when I will cut off your strength and that of your father’s house, so that no man in your house will live to old age. 32 And you will look upon a rival in my dwelling amid all the good that is done to Israel, and never again will there be an old man in your house. 33 The man of yours whom I do not cut off from serving at my altar will cause your eyes to fail and will bring you grief, but the greater number of your house will die by the sword of men. 34 And what happens to your two sons, Hophʹni and Phinʹe·has, will be the sign for you: On one day both of them will die. 35 Then I will raise up for myself a faithful priest. He will act in harmony with what is my heart’s desire; and I will build for him a lasting house, and he will walk before my anointed one always. 36 Anyone who remains in your house will come and bow down to him for the payment of money and a loaf of bread, and will say: “Assign me, please, to one of the priestly offices to eat a piece of bread.”’”
20 Then David ran away from Naiʹoth in Raʹmah. However, he came to Jonʹa·than and said: “What have I done? What is my offense, and how have I sinned against your father for him to seek my life?” 2 At this Jonʹa·than said to him: “It is unthinkable! You will not die. Look! My father will not do anything, great or small, without disclosing it to me. Why should my father hide this matter from me? This will not happen.” 3 But David swore further and said: “Your father surely knows that I have found favor in your eyes and would say, ‘Do not let Jonʹa·than know this or he will be upset.’ But as surely as Jehovah is living and as surely as you are living, there is only a step between me and death!”4 Then Jonʹa·than said to David: “Whatever you say, I will do for you.” 5 David said to Jonʹa·than: “Tomorrow is the new moon, and I am certainly expected to sit with the king to eat; you must send me away, and I will hide in the field until the evening on the third day. 6 If your father misses me at all, then say, ‘David begged me for permission to go quickly to his city Bethʹle·hem, because there is a yearly sacrifice there for all the family.’ 7 If his response is, ‘That is fine,’ it means peace to your servant. But if he becomes angry, you can be sure that he is determined to harm me. 8 Show loyal love to your servant, for you have brought your servant into Jehovah’s covenant with you. But if I am guilty, put me to death yourself. Why turn me over to your father?”9 To this Jonʹa·than said: “It is unthinkable to suggest that about you! If I learn that my father is determined to harm you, would I not tell you?” 10 Then David said to Jonʹa·than: “Who will tell me whether your father gives you a harsh answer?” 11 Jonʹa·than said to David: “Come, let us go out into the field.” So both of them went out into the field. 12 And Jonʹa·than said to David: “Let Jehovah the God of Israel be a witness that I will sound out my father about this time tomorrow or by the third day. If he is favorably disposed toward David, will I not then send you word and disclose it to you? 13 But if my father intends to harm you, may Jehovah do that and more to Jonʹa·than if I do not disclose it to you and send you away in peace. May Jehovah be with you, just as he was with my father. 14 And will you not show me the loyal love of Jehovah while I am alive and even when I die? 15 Never withdraw your loyal love from my household, even when Jehovah wipes out all the enemies of David from the face of the earth.” 16 So Jonʹa·than made a covenant with the house of David, saying, “Jehovah will require it and call David’s enemies to account.” 17 So Jonʹa·than had David swear again by his love for him, for he loved him as he loved himself.18 Jonʹa·than then said to him: “Tomorrow is the new moon, and you will be missed, for your seat will be vacant. 19 By the third day, you will be missed even more, and you must go to the place where you hid the other day and stay near the stone here. 20 I will then shoot three arrows to one side of it, as though I were shooting at a target. 21 When I send the attendant, I will say, ‘Go, find the arrows.’ If I say to the attendant, ‘Look! The arrows are on this side of you, get them,’ then you may come back, for as surely as Jehovah is living, it means everything is peaceful for you and there is no danger. 22 But if I should say to the boy, ‘Look! The arrows are beyond you,’ then go, for Jehovah has sent you away. 23 As for the promise that we have made, you and I, may Jehovah be between us forever.”24 So David hid in the field. When the new moon came, the king took his seat at the meal to eat. 25 The king was sitting in his usual seat by the wall. Jonʹa·than was facing him, and Abʹner was sitting at Saul’s side, but David’s place was vacant. 26 Saul did not say anything that day, for he said to himself: ‘Something has happened so that he is not clean. Yes, he must be unclean.’ 27 And the day after the new moon, on the second day, David’s place continued vacant. Saul then said to Jonʹa·than his son: “Why has the son of Jesʹse not come to the meal either yesterday or today?” 28 Jonʹa·than answered Saul: “David begged me for permission to go to Bethʹle·hem. 29 He said, ‘Please permit me to go, because we have a family sacrifice in the city, and my own brother summoned me. So if I have found favor in your eyes, please let me slip away to see my brothers.’ That is why he has not come to the king’s table.” 30 Then Saul became enraged with Jonʹa·than, and he said to him: “You son of a rebellious woman, do you think I do not know that you are choosing to side with the son of Jesʹse, to your own shame and to the shame of your mother? 31 As long as the son of Jesʹse is alive on the earth, you and your kingship will not be firmly established. So now send someone to bring him to me, for he must die.”32 However, Jonʹa·than said to Saul his father: “Why should he be put to death? What has he done?” 33 At that Saul hurled the spear at him to strike him, so Jonʹa·than knew that his father was determined to put David to death. 34 Jonʹa·than immediately rose up from the table in the heat of anger, and he did not eat any food on the second day after the new moon, for he was upset over David and his own father had humiliated him.35 In the morning Jonʹa·than went out to the field for the appointment with David, and a young attendant was with him. 36 And he said to his attendant: “Please run and find the arrows that I shoot.” The attendant ran, and Jonʹa·than shot the arrow beyond him. 37 When the attendant reached the place where Jonʹa·than had shot the arrow, Jonʹa·than called out to the attendant: “Is not the arrow beyond you?” 38 Jonʹa·than called out to the attendant: “Hurry! Go quickly! Do not delay!” And Jonʹa·than’s attendant picked up the arrows and came back to his master. 39 The attendant did not understand anything about the matter; only Jonʹa·than and David knew what was meant. 40 Then Jonʹa·than gave his weapons to his attendant and told him: “Go, take them to the city.”41 When the attendant left, David rose up from a place nearby that was to the south. Then he fell with his face to the ground and bowed three times, and they kissed each other and wept for each other, but David wept the most. 42 Jonʹa·than said to David: “Go in peace, since we have both sworn in the name of Jehovah, saying, ‘May Jehovah be between you and me and between your offspring and my offspring forever.’”Then David rose up and left, and Jonʹa·than went back to the city.
21 David later came to Nob to A·himʹe·lech the priest. A·himʹe·lech began to tremble when he met David, and he said to him: “Why are you by yourself and no one is with you?” 2 David replied to A·himʹe·lech the priest: “The king instructed me to do something, but he said, ‘Do not let anyone know anything about the mission on which I am sending you and about the instructions I have given you.’ I made an appointment with my young men to meet at a certain place. 3 Now if there are five loaves of bread at your disposal, just give them to me, or whatever is available.” 4 But the priest answered David: “There is no ordinary bread on hand, but there is holy bread—provided that the young men have kept away from women.” 5 David answered the priest: “Women have certainly been kept away from us as on previous occasions when I went out on a campaign. If the bodies of the young men are holy even when the mission is ordinary, how much more so today should they be holy!” 6 So the priest gave him the holy bread, because there was no bread there except the showbread, which had been removed from Jehovah’s presence to be replaced by fresh bread on the day it was taken away.7 Now one of Saul’s servants was there on that day, detained before Jehovah. His name was Doʹeg the Eʹdom·ite, the chief of Saul’s shepherds.8 David then said to A·himʹe·lech: “Is there a spear or a sword here at your disposal? I did not take my own sword or my weapons with me, because the king’s mission was urgent.” 9 To this the priest said: “The sword of Go·liʹath the Phi·lisʹtine, whom you struck down in the Valley of Eʹlah, is here, wrapped up in a cloth behind the ephʹod. If you want to take it for yourself, take it, because it is the only one here.” David said: “There is none like it. Give it to me.”10 That day David rose up and continued his flight from Saul, and he eventually came to King Aʹchish of Gath. 11 The servants of Aʹchish said to him: “Is this not David, the king of the land? Is he not the one they sang about when they danced, saying,‘Saul has struck down his thousands,And David his tens of thousands’?”12 David took these words to heart, and he became very much afraid of King Aʹchish of Gath. 13 So he disguised his sanity in their presence and acted insane while among them. He was making marks on the doors of the gate and letting his saliva run down his beard. 14 Finally Aʹchish said to his servants: “You see that this man is crazy! Why bring him to me? 15 Do I have a shortage of crazy men that I need to have this one acting crazy before me? Should this man enter my house?”
22 So David went from there, escaping to the cave of A·dulʹlam. When his brothers and his father’s entire house heard of it, they went down there to him. 2 And all those who were in trouble and in debt and who had a grievance gathered to him, and he became their chief. There were about 400 men with him.3 David later went from there to Mizʹpeh in Moʹab and said to the king of Moʹab: “Please let my father and mother stay with you until I know what God will do for me.” 4 So he left them with the king of Moʹab, and they stayed with him the whole time that David was in the stronghold.5 In time Gad the prophet said to David: “Do not stay in the stronghold. Go from there into the land of Judah.” So David left and went into the forest of Heʹreth.6 Saul heard that David and the men with him had been found. Saul was then sitting in Gibʹe·ah under the tamarisk tree on the high place with his spear in his hand, and all his servants were stationed around him. 7 Then Saul said to his servants stationed around him: “Listen, please, you Benʹja·min·ites. Will the son of Jesʹse also give fields and vineyards to all of you? Will he appoint all of you as chiefs of thousands and chiefs of hundreds? 8 All of you have conspired against me! No one informed me when my own son made a covenant with the son of Jesʹse! Not one of you has sympathy for me and informs me that my own son has incited my own servant against me to ambush me, as is now the case.”9 Then Doʹeg the Eʹdom·ite, who was stationed there over the servants of Saul, answered: “I saw the son of Jesʹse come to Nob to A·himʹe·lech the son of A·hiʹtub. 10 And he inquired of Jehovah for him and gave him provisions. He even gave him the sword of Go·liʹath the Phi·lisʹtine.” 11 At once the king sent for A·himʹe·lech son of A·hiʹtub the priest and all the priests of his father’s house, who were in Nob. So all of them came to the king.12 Saul now said: “Listen, please, you son of A·hiʹtub!” to which he replied: “Here I am, my lord.” 13 Saul said to him: “Why have you conspired against me, you and the son of Jesʹse, by giving him bread and a sword and by making an inquiry of God for him? He opposes me and waits in ambush, as is now the case.” 14 At this A·himʹe·lech answered the king: “Who among all your servants is as trustworthy as David? He is the king’s son-in-law and a chief over your bodyguard and honored in your house. 15 Was today the first time I inquired of God for him? What you are saying is unthinkable on my part! Do not let the king hold anything against his servant and against my father’s entire house, for your servant did not know a single thing about any of this.”16 But the king said: “You will surely die, A·himʹe·lech, you along with all your father’s house.” 17 With that the king said to the guards stationed around him: “Turn and kill the priests of Jehovah, because they have sided with David! They knew that he was a runaway, and they did not inform me!” But the king’s servants did not want to lift their hands to assault the priests of Jehovah. 18 Then the king said to Doʹeg: “You turn and assault the priests!” Immediately Doʹeg the Eʹdom·ite went and assaulted the priests himself. He killed on that day 85 men wearing the linen ephʹod. 19 He also struck Nob, the city of the priests, with the sword; man as well as woman, child as well as infant, bull, donkey, and sheep, he put to the sword.20 However, one son of A·himʹe·lech the son of A·hiʹtub, whose name was A·biʹa·thar, escaped and ran away to follow David. 21 A·biʹa·thar told David: “Saul has killed the priests of Jehovah.” 22 At this David said to A·biʹa·thar: “I knew on that day, when Doʹeg the Eʹdom·ite was there, that he would be sure to tell Saul. I am personally responsible for the death of everyone in your father’s house. 23 Stay with me. Do not be afraid, for whoever seeks your life seeks my life; you are under my protection.”
23 In time David was told: “The Phi·lisʹtines are fighting against Keiʹlah, and they are raiding the threshing floors.” 2 So David inquired of Jehovah: “Should I go and strike down these Phi·lisʹtines?” Jehovah said to David: “Go, strike down the Phi·lisʹtines and rescue Keiʹlah.” 3 But the men of David said to him: “Look! We are afraid while here in Judah; how much more so if we go to Keiʹlah against the battle line of the Phi·lisʹtines!” 4 So David inquired once again of Jehovah. Jehovah now answered him: “Rise up; go down to Keiʹlah because I will give the Phi·lisʹtines into your hand.” 5 So David went with his men to Keiʹlah and fought against the Phi·lisʹtines; he carried off their livestock and struck them down with a great slaughter, and David rescued the inhabitants of Keiʹlah.6 Now when A·biʹa·thar the son of A·himʹe·lech ran away to David at Keiʹlah, he had an ephʹod with him. 7 Saul was told: “David has come to Keiʹlah.” Then Saul said: “God has handed him over to me, for he has trapped himself by entering a city with gates and bars.” 8 So Saul summoned all the people to war, to go down to Keiʹlah and besiege David and his men. 9 When David learned that Saul was plotting against him, he said to A·biʹa·thar the priest: “Bring the ephʹod here.” 10 Then David said: “O Jehovah the God of Israel, your servant has indeed heard that Saul intends to come to Keiʹlah to destroy the city because of me. 11 Will the leaders of Keiʹlah surrender me into his hand? Will Saul come down as your servant has heard? O Jehovah the God of Israel, please tell your servant.” To this Jehovah said: “He will come down.” 12 David asked: “Will the leaders of Keiʹlah surrender me and my men into Saul’s hand?” Jehovah replied: “They will surrender you.”13 At once David rose up with his men, about 600 in number, and they left Keiʹlah and moved about wherever they could. When Saul was told that David had escaped from Keiʹlah, he did not go out after him. 14 David stayed in the wilderness in places difficult to approach, in the mountainous region of the wilderness of Ziph. Saul searched for him constantly, but Jehovah did not give him into his hand. 15 David was aware that Saul had gone out to seek his life while David was in the wilderness of Ziph at Hoʹresh.16 Jonʹa·than the son of Saul now went out to David at Hoʹresh, and he helped him find strength in Jehovah. 17 He said to him: “Do not be afraid, for my father Saul will not find you; you will be king over Israel, and I will become second to you; and my father Saul also knows that.” 18 Then the two of them made a covenant before Jehovah, and David stayed in Hoʹresh, and Jonʹa·than went to his home.19 The men of Ziph later went up to Saul at Gibʹe·ah and said: “Is not David hiding near us in the places difficult to approach at Hoʹresh, on the hill of Hach·iʹlah, which is south of Je·shiʹmon? 20 Whenever it pleases you to come down, O king, come, and we will surrender him into the hand of the king.” 21 At this Saul said: “May you be blessed by Jehovah, for you have shown compassion to me. 22 Please go and try to find out exactly where he is and who saw him there, for I have been told that he is very cunning. 23 Carefully ascertain where all his hiding places are and return to me with the evidence. I will then go with you, and if he is in the land, I will search him out among all the thousands of Judah.”24 So they left and went to Ziph ahead of Saul, while David and his men were in the wilderness of Maʹon, in the Arʹa·bah to the south of Je·shiʹmon. 25 Then Saul came with his men to look for him. When David was told, he at once went down to the crag and stayed in the wilderness of Maʹon. When Saul heard this, he chased after David into the wilderness of Maʹon. 26 As Saul came to one side of the mountain, David and his men were on the other side of the mountain. David was hurrying to get away from Saul, but Saul and his men were closing in on David and his men to capture them. 27 But a messenger came to Saul, saying: “Come quickly, for the Phi·lisʹtines have made a raid on the land!” 28 At that Saul stopped chasing after David and went to confront the Phi·lisʹtines. That is why that place was named the Crag of the Divisions.29 Then David made his way up from there and stayed in the places difficult to approach at En-gedʹi.
24 As soon as Saul returned from pursuing the Phi·lisʹtines, they told him: “Look! David is in the wilderness of En-gedʹi.”2 So Saul took 3,000 men chosen from all Israel and went to look for David and his men on the rocky cliffs of the mountain goats. 3 Saul came to the stone sheepfolds along the road, where there was a cave, and he went in to relieve himself while David and his men were sitting in the recesses at the back of the cave. 4 David’s men said to him: “This is the day on which Jehovah is saying to you, ‘Look! I am giving your enemy into your hand, and you can do to him whatever seems good to you.’” So David rose up and quietly cut off the edge of Saul’s sleeveless coat. 5 But afterward David’s heart kept striking him because he had cut off the edge of Saul’s sleeveless coat. 6 He said to his men: “It is unthinkable from Jehovah’s standpoint that I should do such a thing to my lord, the anointed of Jehovah, by lifting my hand against him, for he is the anointed of Jehovah.” 7 So David restrained his men with these words, and he did not allow them to attack Saul. As for Saul, he rose up from the cave and went on his way.8 Then David got up and went out from the cave and called out after Saul: “My lord the king!” When Saul looked behind him, David bowed down low with his face to the ground and prostrated himself. 9 David said to Saul: “Why do you listen to the words of men who say, ‘Look! David is seeking to harm you’? 10 This very day your own eyes have seen how Jehovah gave you into my hand in the cave. But when someone said to kill you, I had pity on you and said, ‘I will not lift my hand against my lord, for he is the anointed of Jehovah.’ 11 And look, my father, yes, see the edge of your sleeveless coat in my hand; for when I cut off the edge of your sleeveless coat, I did not kill you. You can now see and understand that I do not intend to harm you or to rebel, and I have not sinned against you, whereas you are hunting me down to take my life. 12 May Jehovah judge between you and me, and may Jehovah take vengeance on you for me, but my hand will not come against you. 13 Just as the ancient proverb says, ‘From the wicked comes wickedness,’ but my hand will not come against you. 14 After whom has the king of Israel gone out? Whom are you chasing? A dead dog? A single flea? 15 May Jehovah be the judge, and he will judge between you and me, and he will see and will plead my case and judge me and rescue me from your hand.”16 At the moment that David finished speaking these words to him, Saul said: “Is this your voice, my son David?” And Saul began to weep loudly. 17 He said to David: “You are more righteous than I am, for you have treated me well and I have repaid you with evil. 18 Yes, today you have told me of the good you did by not killing me when Jehovah surrendered me into your hand. 19 For what man finds his enemy and sends him on his way unharmed? Jehovah will reward you with good because of what you have done for me today. 20 And now look! I know that you will surely rule as king and that in your hand the kingdom of Israel will endure. 21 Now swear to me by Jehovah that you will not wipe out my descendants after me and that you will not annihilate my name out of my father’s house.” 22 So David swore to Saul, after which Saul went home. But David and his men went up to the stronghold.
25 In time Samuel died; and all Israel gathered together to mourn for him and to bury him at his house in Raʹmah. Then David rose and went down to the wilderness of Paʹran.2 Now there was a man in Maʹon whose work was in Carʹmel. The man was very wealthy; he had 3,000 sheep and 1,000 goats, and he was then shearing his sheep at Carʹmel. 3 The man’s name was Naʹbal, and his wife’s name was Abʹi·gail. The wife was discerning and beautiful, but the husband, a Caʹleb·ite, was harsh, and he behaved badly. 4 David heard in the wilderness that Naʹbal was shearing his sheep. 5 So David sent ten young men to him, and David told the young men: “Go up to Carʹmel, and when you come to Naʹbal, ask him in my name about his welfare. 6 Then say, ‘May you live long and may you be well and may your household be well and may all that you have be well. 7 Now I hear that you are doing your shearing. When your shepherds were with us, we did not harm them, and they found nothing missing the whole time they were in Carʹmel. 8 Ask your young men, and they will tell you. May my young men find favor in your eyes, because we have come at a joyous time. Please give to your servants and to your son David whatever you can spare.’”9 So David’s young men went and told all of this to Naʹbal in David’s name. When they finished, 10 Naʹbal answered David’s servants: “Who is David, and who is the son of Jesʹse? Nowadays many servants are breaking away from their masters. 11 Do I have to take my bread and my water and the meat that I butchered for my shearers and give it to men who come from who knows where?”12 At that David’s young men returned and reported all these words to him. 13 David immediately said to his men: “Everyone strap on your sword!” So they all strapped on their swords, and David also strapped on his own sword, and about 400 men went up with David, while 200 men stayed with the baggage.14 Meanwhile, one of the servants reported to Abʹi·gail, Naʹbal’s wife: “Look! David sent messengers from the wilderness to wish our master well, but he screamed insults at them. 15 Those men were very good to us. They never harmed us, and we did not miss a single thing the whole time we were together with them in the fields. 16 They were like a protective wall around us, both by night and by day, the whole time we were with them shepherding the flock. 17 Now decide what you are going to do, for disaster has been determined against our master and against all his house, and he is such a worthless man that no one can speak to him.”18 So Abʹi·gail quickly took 200 loaves of bread, two large jars of wine, five dressed sheep, five seah measures of roasted grain, 100 cakes of raisins, and 200 cakes of pressed figs and put all of it on the donkeys. 19 Then she said to her servants: “Go on ahead of me; I will follow you.” But she said nothing to her husband Naʹbal.20 While she was riding on the donkey and going down under cover of the mountain, just then David and his men were coming down toward her, and she met them. 21 Now David had been saying: “It was for nothing that I guarded everything that belongs to this fellow in the wilderness. Not a single thing belonging to him went missing, and yet he repays me evil for good. 22 May God do the same and more to the enemies of David if I allow a single male of his to survive until the morning.”23 When Abʹi·gail caught sight of David, she hurried down off the donkey and threw herself facedown before David, bowing to the ground. 24 She then fell at his feet and said: “My lord, let the blame be on me; let your servant girl speak to you, and listen to the words of your servant girl. 25 Please, do not let my lord pay attention to this worthless Naʹbal, for he is just like his name. Naʹbal is his name, and senselessness is with him. But I, your servant girl, did not see my lord’s young men whom you sent. 26 And now, my lord, as surely as Jehovah is living and as you are living, it is Jehovah who has held you back from incurring bloodguilt and from taking revenge with your own hand. May your enemies and those seeking injury to my lord become like Naʹbal. 27 Now let this gift that your servant girl has brought to my lord be given to the young men who are following my lord. 28 Pardon, please, the transgression of your servant girl, for Jehovah will without fail make for my lord a lasting house, because my lord is fighting the wars of Jehovah, and no evil has been found in you all your days. 29 When someone rises up to pursue you and seeks your life, the life of my lord will be wrapped securely in the bag of life with Jehovah your God, but the lives of your enemies he will hurl away like stones from a sling. 30 And when Jehovah has done for my lord all the good things he has promised and he appoints you as leader over Israel, 31 you will have no remorse or regret in your heart for shedding blood without cause and for letting the hand of my lord take revenge. When Jehovah confers good upon my lord, remember your servant girl.”32 At this David said to Abʹi·gail: “Praise Jehovah the God of Israel, who sent you this day to meet me! 33 And blessed be your good sense! May you be blessed for restraining me this day from incurring bloodguilt and from taking revenge with my own hands. 34 Otherwise, as surely as Jehovah the God of Israel who held me back from harming you is living, if you had not come quickly to meet me, by morning there would not have remained a single male belonging to Naʹbal.” 35 With that David accepted from her what she had brought him and said to her: “Go up in peace to your house. See, I have listened to you, and I will grant your request.”36 Abʹi·gail later went back to Naʹbal, who was feasting like a king in his house, and Naʹbal was in a good mood and was as drunk as could be. She did not tell him a single thing until the morning light. 37 In the morning, when Naʹbal was sober, his wife told him these things. And his heart became like a dead man’s, and he lay paralyzed like a stone. 38 About ten days later, Jehovah struck Naʹbal, and he died.39 When David heard that Naʹbal had died, he said: “Praise Jehovah, who has pleaded my case of reproach from Naʹbal and has kept his servant from doing anything bad, and Jehovah has brought the badness of Naʹbal back on his own head!” Then David sent word to propose to Abʹi·gail to take her as his wife. 40 So David’s servants came to Abʹi·gail at Carʹmel and said to her: “David has sent us to you to take you as his wife.” 41 She immediately rose up and bowed with her face to the ground and said: “Here is your slave as a servant to wash the feet of the servants of my lord.” 42 Then Abʹi·gail quickly rose up and rode on her donkey with five of her female servants walking behind her; she accompanied the messengers of David and became his wife.43 David had also married A·hinʹo·am from Jezʹre·el, and both women became his wives.44 But Saul had given his daughter Miʹchal, David’s wife, to Palʹti the son of Laʹish, who was from Galʹlim.
26 In time the men of Ziph came to Saul at Gibʹe·ah, saying: “Is David not hiding on the hill of Hach·iʹlah facing Je·shiʹmon?” 2 So Saul rose up and went down to the wilderness of Ziph with 3,000 chosen men of Israel to look for David in the wilderness of Ziph. 3 Saul camped on the hill of Hach·iʹlah, which faces Je·shiʹmon, by the road. David was then living in the wilderness, and he learned that Saul had come into the wilderness after him. 4 So David sent spies to verify that Saul had indeed come. 5 David later went to the place where Saul had encamped, and David saw the place where Saul and Abʹner the son of Ner, the chief of his army, were lying asleep; Saul lay asleep in the camp enclosure with the troops camping all around him. 6 Then David said to A·himʹe·lech the Hitʹtite and A·bishʹai the son of Ze·ruʹiah, the brother of Joʹab: “Who will go down with me into the camp to Saul?” A·bishʹai replied: “I will go down with you.” 7 So David and A·bishʹai made their way to the troops by night, and they found Saul lying asleep in the camp enclosure with his spear stuck into the ground next to his head; Abʹner and the troops were lying all around him.8 A·bishʹai now said to David: “Today God has surrendered your enemy into your hand. And now, please, let me pin him to the ground with the spear just once, and I will not need to do it twice.” 9 However, David said to A·bishʹai: “Do not harm him, for who can lift his hand against the anointed of Jehovah and remain innocent?” 10 David continued: “As surely as Jehovah is living, Jehovah himself will strike him down, or his day will come and he will die, or he will go down into battle and perish. 11 It is unthinkable from Jehovah’s standpoint for me to lift my hand against the anointed of Jehovah! So now take, please, the spear next to his head and the water jug, and let us be on our way.” 12 So David took the spear and the water jug from next to Saul’s head, and they went away. No one saw or noticed them or woke up, for they were all asleep, because a deep sleep from Jehovah had fallen upon them. 13 Then David crossed to the other side and stood on the top of the mountain some distance away, with a considerable space between them.14 David called out to the troops and to Abʹner the son of Ner, saying: “Abʹner, will you not answer?” Abʹner answered: “Who are you who calls to the king?” 15 David said to Abʹner: “Are you not a man? And who is like you in Israel? So why did you not keep watch over your lord the king? For one of the soldiers came in to do away with your lord the king. 16 What you have done is not good. As surely as Jehovah is living, you deserve to die, because you have not kept watch over your lord, the anointed of Jehovah. Now look around! Where are the king’s spear and the water jug that were next to his head?”17 Then Saul recognized the voice of David and said: “Is this your voice, my son David?” David replied: “It is my voice, my lord the king.” 18 He added: “Why is my lord chasing after his servant, for what have I done, and what am I guilty of? 19 My lord the king, please, listen to the words of his servant: If it is Jehovah who incited you against me, let him accept my grain offering. But if men have incited you, they are cursed before Jehovah, because they have driven me away today from being united with Jehovah’s inheritance, saying, ‘Go, serve other gods!’ 20 And now do not let my blood fall to the ground away from the presence of Jehovah, for the king of Israel has gone out to look for a single flea, as if he were chasing a partridge on the mountains.”21 In turn Saul said: “I have sinned. Come back, my son David, for I will do you no more harm, because you regarded my life as precious this day. Yes, I have acted foolishly and have made a terrible mistake.” 22 David answered: “Here is the spear of the king. Let one of the young men come over and take it. 23 It is Jehovah who will repay each one for his own righteousness and his own faithfulness, for today Jehovah gave you into my hand, but I was unwilling to lift my hand against the anointed of Jehovah. 24 Look! Just as your life was precious to me this day, so may my life be precious in the eyes of Jehovah, and may he rescue me out of all distress.” 25 Saul replied to David: “May you be blessed, my son David. You will surely do great things, and you will surely prevail.” Then David went on his way, and Saul returned to his place.
27 However, David said in his heart: “One day I will perish by Saul’s hand. The best thing for me is to escape to the land of the Phi·lisʹtines; then Saul will give up looking for me in all the territory of Israel, and I will escape from his hand.” 2 So David rose up with the 600 men who were with him and went over to Aʹchish the son of Maʹoch, the king of Gath. 3 David stayed with Aʹchish in Gath, he and his men, each man with his household. With David were his two wives, A·hinʹo·am of Jezʹre·el and Abʹi·gail the Carʹmel·ite, Naʹbal’s widow. 4 When report was made to Saul that David had run away to Gath, he stopped searching for him.5 Then David said to Aʹchish: “If I have found favor in your eyes, let them give me a place in one of the cities of the countryside, so that I may live there. Why should your servant live in the royal city with you?” 6 So Aʹchish gave him Zikʹlag on that day. That is why Zikʹlag belongs to the kings of Judah down to this day.7 The length of time that David lived in the countryside of the Phi·lisʹtines was a year and four months. 8 David would go up with his men to raid the Geshʹur·ites, the Girʹzites, and the A·malʹek·ites, for they were inhabiting the land that extended from Teʹlam as far as Shur and down to the land of Egypt. 9 When David would attack the land, he preserved neither man nor woman alive, but he took the flocks, herds, donkeys, camels, and clothing, after which he would return to Aʹchish. 10 Then Aʹchish would ask: “Where did you make a raid today?” David would reply: “Against the south of Judah” or “Against the south of the Je·rahʹme·el·ites” or “Against the south of the Kenʹites.” 11 David did not spare alive any man or woman to be brought to Gath, saying: “That they may not tell them about us and say, ‘This is what David did.’” (And that was his practice the whole time he lived in the countryside of the Phi·lisʹtines.) 12 So Aʹchish believed David, saying to himself: ‘He has certainly become a stench among his people Israel, so he will always be my servant.’
28 In those days the Phi·lisʹtines assembled their armies for war against Israel. So Aʹchish said to David: “You know, of course, that you and your men will go out into battle with me.” 2 At that David said to Aʹchish: “You surely know what your servant will do.” Aʹchish said to David: “That is why I will appoint you as my permanent bodyguard.”3 Now Samuel had died, and all Israel had mourned him and had buried him in Raʹmah, his own city. And Saul had removed the spirit mediums and the fortune-tellers from the land.4 The Phi·lisʹtines assembled and went and set up camp in Shuʹnem. So Saul assembled all Israel, and they set up camp in Gil·boʹa. 5 When Saul saw the camp of the Phi·lisʹtines, he was afraid, and his heart trembled greatly. 6 Although Saul would inquire of Jehovah, Jehovah never answered him, either in dreams or by the Uʹrim or through the prophets. 7 Finally Saul said to his servants: “Find me a woman who is a spirit medium, and I will go and consult her.” His servants replied: “Look! There is a woman who is a spirit medium in En-dor.”8 So Saul disguised himself and put on other garments and went to the woman by night with two of his men. He said: “Use divination, please, by acting as a spirit medium, and bring up for me the one whom I designate to you.” 9 However, the woman said to him: “You must know what Saul did, how he removed the spirit mediums and the fortune-tellers from the land. Why, then, are you trying to trap me to have me put to death?” 10 Saul then swore to her by Jehovah, saying: “As surely as Jehovah is alive, you will not incur any guilt in this matter!” 11 At this the woman said: “Whom should I bring up for you?” He replied: “Bring up Samuel for me.” 12 When the woman saw “Samuel,” she cried out at the top of her voice and said to Saul: “Why did you trick me? You are Saul!” 13 The king said to her: “Do not be afraid, but what do you see?” The woman replied to Saul: “I see one like a god coming up out of the earth.” 14 At once he asked her: “What does he look like?” to which she said: “It is an old man coming up, and he is clothed in a sleeveless coat.” At that Saul realized that it was “Samuel,” and he bowed low with his face to the ground and prostrated himself.15 Then “Samuel” said to Saul: “Why have you disturbed me by having me brought up?” Saul replied: “I am in great trouble. The Phi·lisʹtines are fighting against me, and God has departed from me and no longer answers me, either through the prophets or in dreams; so that is why I am calling on you to let me know what I should do.”16 And “Samuel” said: “Why do you inquire of me now that Jehovah has departed from you and has become your adversary? 17 Jehovah will do for himself what he foretold through me: Jehovah will rip the kingdom out of your hands and give it to one of your fellow men, David. 18 Because you did not obey the voice of Jehovah and you did not execute his burning anger against the A·malʹek·ites, that is why Jehovah is doing this to you this day. 19 Jehovah will also give both Israel and you into the hand of the Phi·lisʹtines, and tomorrow you and your sons will be with me. Jehovah will also give the army of Israel into the hands of the Phi·lisʹtines.”20 At once Saul fell full length on the ground and became very much afraid because of “Samuel’s” words. And there was no strength left in him, because he had not eaten food all day and all night. 21 When the woman came to Saul and saw that he had been greatly disturbed, she said to him: “Here your servant has obeyed what you said, and I risked my life and did what you told me to do. 22 Now, please, listen to what your servant has to say. Let me set before you a piece of bread; then eat so that you will have some strength to go on your way.” 23 But he refused and said: “I am not going to eat.” However, his servants and also the woman kept urging him. Finally he listened to them and got up from the ground and sat on the bed. 24 The woman had a fattened calf in the house, so she quickly slaughtered it and took flour and kneaded dough and baked it into unleavened bread. 25 She served them to Saul and his servants, and they ate. After that they rose up and left during the night.
29 The Phi·lisʹtines assembled all their armies at Aʹphek, while the Israelites were camping by the spring in Jezʹre·el. 2 And the lords of the Phi·lisʹtines were passing by with their hundreds and their thousands, and David and his men were marching at the rear with Aʹchish. 3 But the princes of the Phi·lisʹtines said: “Why are these Hebrews here?” Aʹchish replied to the princes of the Phi·lisʹtines: “This is David, the servant of King Saul of Israel, who has been with me for a year or more. I have not found any fault in him from the day he deserted to me until today.” 4 But the princes of the Phi·lisʹtines became indignant at him, and they said to him: “Make the man go back. Let him return to the place where you assigned him. Do not let him go down with us into the battle, so that he will not turn against us during the battle. For what better way to put himself in favor with his lord than with the heads of our men? 5 Is this not the David about whom they sang when they danced, saying:‘Saul has struck down his thousands,And David his tens of thousands’?”6 So Aʹchish summoned David and said to him: “As surely as Jehovah is living, you are upright, and I am pleased to have you go on the campaign with my army, for I have not found any fault with you from the day you came to me until today. But the lords do not trust you. 7 So return in peace, and do not do anything to displease the lords of the Phi·lisʹtines.” 8 However, David said to Aʹchish: “Why, what have I done? What fault have you found in your servant from the day that I came to you until today? Why should I not come with you and fight against the enemies of my lord the king?” 9 Aʹchish answered David: “From my standpoint, you have been as good as an angel of God. But the princes of the Phi·lisʹtines have said, ‘Do not let him go up with us into the battle.’ 10 Now get up early in the morning with the servants of your lord who came with you; rise up and leave early in the morning as soon as it is light.”11 So David and his men rose up early in the morning to return to the land of the Phi·lisʹtines, and the Phi·lisʹtines went up to Jezʹre·el.
3 Meanwhile, the boy Samuel was ministering to Jehovah before Eʹli, but word from Jehovah had become rare in those days; visions were not widespread.2 One day Eʹli was lying down in his usual place, and his eyes had grown dim; he was not able to see. 3 The lamp of God had not yet been extinguished, and Samuel was lying in the temple of Jehovah, where the Ark of God was. 4 Jehovah then called Samuel. He answered: “Here I am.” 5 He ran to Eʹli and said: “Here I am, for you called me.” But he said: “I did not call. Lie down again.” So he went and lay down. 6 Jehovah called once again: “Samuel!” At this Samuel got up and went to Eʹli and said: “Here I am, for you called me.” But he said: “I did not call, my son. Lie down again.” 7 (Now Samuel had not yet come to know Jehovah, and the word of Jehovah had not yet been revealed to him.) 8 So Jehovah called again, a third time: “Samuel!” At that he got up and went to Eʹli and said: “Here I am, for you called me.”Eʹli then realized that it was Jehovah who was calling the boy. 9 So Eʹli said to Samuel: “Go, lie down, and if he calls you, you should say, ‘Speak, Jehovah, for your servant is listening.’” And Samuel went and lay down in his place.10 Jehovah came and stood there, and he called as at the other times: “Samuel, Samuel!” At this Samuel said: “Speak, for your servant is listening.” 11 Jehovah said to Samuel: “Look! I am doing something in Israel that will make both ears of anyone who hears about it tingle. 12 On that day I will carry out toward Eʹli all that I said about his house, from start to finish. 13 You must tell him that I am bringing a lasting judgment on his house for the error that he has known about, for his sons are cursing God, but he has not rebuked them. 14 That is why I have sworn to the house of Eʹli that the error of the house of Eʹli will never be atoned for by sacrifices or by offerings.”15 Samuel lay down until the morning; then he opened the doors of Jehovah’s house. Samuel was afraid to tell Eʹli of the vision. 16 But Eʹli called for Samuel: “Samuel, my son!” At this he said: “Here I am.” 17 He asked: “What message did he speak to you? Please, do not hide it from me. May God do so to you and add to it if you hide from me a single word of all that he said to you.” 18 So Samuel told him everything, and he did not hide anything from him. Eʹli said: “It is Jehovah. Let him do what is good in his eyes.”19 Samuel continued growing up, and Jehovah himself was with him and did not let any of all his words go unfulfilled. 20 All Israel from Dan to Beʹer-sheʹba became aware that Samuel had been confirmed as Jehovah’s prophet. 21 And Jehovah continued to appear in Shiʹloh, for Jehovah revealed himself to Samuel in Shiʹloh by the word of Jehovah.
30 When David and his men came to Zikʹlag on the third day, the A·malʹek·ites had made a raid on the south and on Zikʹlag, and they had attacked Zikʹlag and burned it with fire. 2 They had taken captive the women and all who were in it, from the smallest to the greatest. They had not killed anyone, but they had carried them off and gone on their way. 3 When David and his men came to the city, they found it burned down, and their wives and their sons and their daughters had been carried off captive. 4 So David and the men with him began weeping loudly until they had no strength left to weep. 5 David’s two wives had also been carried off captive, A·hinʹo·am of Jezʹre·el and Abʹi·gail the widow of Naʹbal the Carʹmel·ite. 6 David was very distressed, because the men were talking of stoning him, for all the men had become very bitter over the loss of their sons and daughters. But David strengthened himself by Jehovah his God.7 David then said to A·biʹa·thar the priest, the son of A·himʹe·lech: “Please bring the ephʹod here.” So A·biʹa·thar brought the ephʹod to David. 8 David inquired of Jehovah: “Should I chase after this marauder band? Will I overtake them?” At this He said to him: “Go in pursuit, for you will certainly overtake them, and you will make the rescue.”9 David immediately set out with the 600 men who were with him, and they went on as far as the Wadi Beʹsor, where some of the men stayed behind. 10 David kept up the chase with 400 men, but the 200 men who were too tired to cross the Wadi Beʹsor stayed behind.11 They found an Egyptian man in the field and took him to David. They gave him food to eat and water to drink, 12 as well as a slice of a cake of pressed figs and two cakes of raisins. After he ate, he regained his strength, for he had not eaten any food or drunk any water for three days and three nights. 13 David now asked him: “To whom do you belong, and where are you from?” to which he said: “I am an Egyptian attendant, a slave of an A·malʹek·ite man, but my master left me because I got sick three days ago. 14 We made a raid on the south of the Cherʹe·thites and on the territory of Judah and on the south of Caʹleb, and Zikʹlag we burned with fire.” 15 At this David said to him: “Will you lead me down to this marauder band?” He replied: “If you swear to me by God that you will not put me to death and that you will not hand me over to my master, I will lead you down to this marauder band.”16 So he led him down to where they were spread out all over the land, eating and drinking and celebrating because of all the great spoil that they had taken from the land of the Phi·lisʹtines and the land of Judah. 17 Then David struck them down from the morning darkness until the following evening; not a man escaped except 400 men who fled on camels. 18 David recovered all that the A·malʹek·ites had taken, and David rescued his two wives. 19 Nothing of theirs was missing, from the smallest to the greatest. They recovered their sons and daughters and the spoil; David recovered everything that they had taken. 20 So David took all the flocks and the herds, which they drove before their own livestock. They said: “This is David’s spoil.”21 Then David came to the 200 men who had been too tired to go along with David and who had stayed behind by the Wadi Beʹsor, and they came out to meet David and the people with him. When David came near to the men, he asked them how they were. 22 However, every bad and worthless man among those who had gone with David said: “Since they did not go with us, we will not give them any of the spoil that we recovered except that each one may take his wife and his sons and go away.” 23 But David said: “You must not do this, my brothers, with what Jehovah has given us. He protected us and gave into our hand the marauder band that came against us. 24 Who would agree with you on this? The share of the one who went down into the battle will be the same as the share of the one who sat by the baggage. All will have a share together.” 25 And from that day forward, he kept it set as a regulation and a rule for Israel down to this day.26 When David returned to Zikʹlag, he sent some of the spoil to the elders of Judah who were his friends, saying: “Here is a gift for you from the spoil of Jehovah’s enemies.” 27 He sent it to those who were in Bethʹel, to those in Raʹmoth of the Negʹeb, to those in Jatʹtir, 28 to those in A·roʹer, to those in Siphʹmoth, to those in Esh·te·moʹa, 29 to those in Raʹcal, to those in the cities of the Je·rahʹme·el·ites, to those in the cities of the Kenʹites, 30 to those in Horʹmah, to those in Borʹa·shan, to those in Aʹthach, 31 to those in Hebʹron, and to all the places that David and his men had frequented.
31 Now the Phi·lisʹtines were fighting against Israel. And the men of Israel fled from before the Phi·lisʹtines, and many fell slain on Mount Gil·boʹa. 2 The Phi·lisʹtines kept in close range of Saul and his sons, and the Phi·lisʹtines struck down Jonʹa·than, A·binʹa·dab, and Malʹchi-shuʹa, Saul’s sons. 3 The fighting grew fierce against Saul, and the archers found him, and he was severely wounded by the archers. 4 Then Saul said to his armor-bearer: “Draw your sword and run me through with it, so that these uncircumcised men may not come and run me through and deal ruthlessly with me.” But his armor-bearer was unwilling, because he was very much afraid. So Saul took the sword and fell on it. 5 When his armor-bearer saw that Saul was dead, he too fell on his own sword and died with him. 6 Thus Saul, his three sons, his armor-bearer, and all his men died together on that day. 7 When the people of Israel who were in the region of the valley and in the region of the Jordan saw that the men of Israel had fled and that Saul and his sons had died, they began to abandon the cities and flee; the Phi·lisʹtines then came and occupied them.8 The next day, when the Phi·lisʹtines came to strip the slain, they found Saul and his three sons fallen on Mount Gil·boʹa. 9 So they cut off his head and stripped off his armor and sent word throughout the land of the Phi·lisʹtines to spread the news in the houses of their idols and among the people. 10 Then they put his armor in the house of the Ashʹto·reth images and fastened his corpse to the wall of Beth-shan. 11 When the inhabitants of Jaʹbesh-gilʹe·ad heard what the Phi·lisʹtines had done to Saul, 12 all the warriors rose and traveled all night and took the bodies of Saul and his sons off the wall of Beth-shan. They returned to Jaʹbesh and burned them there. 13 Then they took their bones and buried them under the tamarisk tree in Jaʹbesh, and they fasted for seven days.
4 And the word of Samuel went out to all Israel.Then Israel went out to meet the Phi·lisʹtines in battle; they camped beside Eb·en·eʹzer, and the Phi·lisʹtines were encamped at Aʹphek. 2 The Phi·lisʹtines drew up in battle formation to meet Israel, but the battle went badly and Israel was defeated by the Phi·lisʹtines, who struck down about 4,000 men from the battle line in the field. 3 When the people returned to the camp, the elders of Israel said: “Why did Jehovah allow us to be defeated today by the Phi·lisʹtines? Let us take the ark of Jehovah’s covenant with us from Shiʹloh, so that it may be with us and save us from the hand of our enemies.” 4 So the people sent men to Shiʹloh, and they carried from there the ark of the covenant of Jehovah of armies, who sits enthroned above the cherubs. The two sons of Eʹli, Hophʹni and Phinʹe·has, were also there with the ark of the covenant of the true God.5 As soon as the ark of the covenant of Jehovah came into the camp, all the Israelites broke out into loud shouting, so that the earth shook. 6 When the Phi·lisʹtines heard the sound of the shouting, they said: “Why is there such loud shouting in the camp of the Hebrews?” Finally they learned that the Ark of Jehovah had come into the camp. 7 The Phi·lisʹtines became afraid, for they said: “God has come into the camp!” So they said: “Too bad for us, for nothing like this has ever happened before! 8 Too bad for us! Who will save us from the hand of this majestic God? This is the God who struck Egypt with every sort of slaughter in the wilderness. 9 Be courageous and act like men, you Phi·lisʹtines, so that you may not serve the Hebrews just as they have served you. Act like men and fight!” 10 So the Phi·lisʹtines fought and Israel was defeated, and each one fled to his tent. The slaughter was very great; on Israel’s side, 30,000 foot soldiers fell. 11 Moreover, the Ark of God was captured, and the two sons of Eʹli, Hophʹni and Phinʹe·has, died.12 A man of Benjamin ran from the battle line and arrived at Shiʹloh on that day with his garments ripped apart and dirt on his head. 13 When the man arrived, Eʹli was sitting on the seat by the roadside watching, because his heart was trembling over the Ark of the true God. The man went into the city to report the news, and the whole city began crying out. 14 When Eʹli heard the sound of the outcry, he asked: “What does the sound of this turmoil mean?” The same man hurried in and reported the news to Eʹli. 15 (Now Eʹli was 98 years old, and his eyes stared straight ahead, and he could not see.) 16 Then the man said to Eʹli: “I am the one who came from the battle line! Just today I fled from the battle line.” At this he asked: “What happened, my son?” 17 So the bearer of the news related: “Israel has fled from the Phi·lisʹtines, and there was a great defeat among the people; also your own two sons, Hophʹni and Phinʹe·has, have died, and the Ark of the true God has been captured.”18 At the moment he mentioned the Ark of the true God, Eʹli fell backward from his seat beside the gate, and his neck was broken and he died, for he was old and heavy. He had judged Israel for 40 years. 19 His daughter-in-law, the wife of Phinʹe·has, was pregnant and close to giving birth. When she heard the report that the Ark of the true God had been captured and that her father-in-law and her husband had died, she doubled over and unexpectedly went into labor and gave birth. 20 As she was dying, the women standing by her said: “Do not be afraid, for you have given birth to a son.” She did not answer and did not pay attention to it. 21 But she named the boy Ichʹa·bod, saying: “Glory has gone away from Israel into exile,” referring to the capture of the Ark of the true God and what happened to her father-in-law and her husband. 22 She said: “Glory has gone away from Israel into exile, because the Ark of the true God has been captured.”
5 When the Phi·lisʹtines captured the Ark of the true God, they brought it from Eb·en·eʹzer to Ashʹdod. 2 The Phi·lisʹtines took the Ark of the true God and brought it into the house of Daʹgon and set it beside Daʹgon. 3 When the Ashʹdod·ites got up early the next day, there was Daʹgon fallen facedown on the ground before the Ark of Jehovah. So they took Daʹgon and returned him to his place. 4 When they got up early in the morning on the following day, there was Daʹgon fallen facedown on the ground before the Ark of Jehovah. The head of Daʹgon and the palms of both his hands were cut off and were lying on the threshold. Only the fish part had been left intact. 5 That is why to this day, the priests of Daʹgon and all those who enter the house of Daʹgon do not walk on the threshold of Daʹgon in Ashʹdod.6 The hand of Jehovah was heavy against the Ashʹdod·ites, and he devastated them by striking Ashʹdod and its territories with piles. 7 When the men of Ashʹdod saw what was happening, they said: “Do not let the Ark of the God of Israel remain with us, for his hand has dealt harshly with us and our god Daʹgon.” 8 So they sent for and gathered all the lords of the Phi·lisʹtines and asked them: “What should we do with the Ark of the God of Israel?” They replied: “Let the Ark of the God of Israel be moved to Gath.” So they moved the Ark of the God of Israel there.9 After they moved it there, the hand of Jehovah came against the city, bringing great panic. He struck the men of the city, from small to great, and piles broke out on them. 10 So they sent the Ark of the true God to Ekʹron, but as soon as the Ark of the true God came to Ekʹron, the Ekʹron·ites began to cry out: “They have brought the Ark of the God of Israel to us to put us and our people to death!” 11 Then they sent for and gathered all the lords of the Phi·lisʹtines and said: “Send the Ark of the God of Israel away; let it return to its place so that we and our people may not be put to death.” For the terror of death had spread through the whole city; the hand of the true God had been very heavy there, 12 and the men who did not die had been struck with piles. And the city’s cry for help ascended to the heavens.
6 The Ark of Jehovah was in Phi·lisʹtine territory for seven months. 2 The Phi·lisʹtines called the priests and the diviners and asked: “What should we do with the Ark of Jehovah? Let us know how we should send it back to its place.” 3 They replied: “If you send the ark of the covenant of Jehovah the God of Israel away, do not send it back without an offering. You should by all means return to him a guilt offering. Only then will you be healed, and it will be made known to you why his hand has not turned away from you.” 4 So they asked: “What guilt offering should we send to him?” They said: “According to the number of the lords of the Phi·lisʹtines, send five golden piles and five golden mice, for the same scourge has afflicted every one of you and your lords. 5 You should make images of your piles and images of your mice that are bringing the land to ruin, and you should honor the God of Israel. Perhaps he will lighten the weight of his hand that is on you and your god and your land. 6 Why should you harden your heart as Egypt and Pharʹaoh hardened their hearts? When He dealt harshly with them, they had to send Israel away, and they departed. 7 Now prepare a new wagon and two cows that have calves and have never been under a yoke. Then hitch the cows to the wagon, but take their calves back home, away from them. 8 Take the Ark of Jehovah and place it on the wagon, and put the golden articles that you are sending to him as a guilt offering in a box next to it. Then send it on its way 9 and watch: If it goes up the road to Beth-sheʹmesh, to its own territory, then he is the one who has done this great evil to us. But if not, we will know that it was not his hand that struck us; it happened to us by coincidence.”10 The men did accordingly. They took two cows that had calves and hitched them to the wagon, and the calves they penned up at home. 11 Then they put the Ark of Jehovah on the wagon, as well as the box containing the golden mice and the images of their piles. 12 And the cows went straight ahead on the road to Beth-sheʹmesh. They stayed on the one highway, mooing as they went; they did not turn either to the right or to the left. All the while the lords of the Phi·lisʹtines were walking behind them as far as the boundary of Beth-sheʹmesh. 13 The people of Beth-sheʹmesh were reaping the wheat harvest in the valley plain. When they raised their eyes and saw the Ark, they were overjoyed at seeing it. 14 The wagon came into the field of Joshua the Beth-sheʹmite and stopped there near a large stone. So they chopped up the wood of the wagon, and they offered the cows as a burnt offering to Jehovah.15 The Levites took down the Ark of Jehovah and the box that was with it, which contained the golden articles, and they put them on the large stone. The men of Beth-sheʹmesh offered up burnt offerings and made sacrifices on that day to Jehovah.16 When the five lords of the Phi·lisʹtines saw it, they returned to Ekʹron on that day. 17 Now these are the golden piles that the Phi·lisʹtines sent as a guilt offering to Jehovah: one for Ashʹdod, one for Gazʹa, one for Ashʹke·lon, one for Gath, one for Ekʹron. 18 And the number of the golden mice corresponded to the number of all the cities of the Phi·lisʹtines that belonged to the five lords—both the fortified cities and the villages in the open country.And the large stone upon which they rested the Ark of Jehovah serves as a witness down to this day in the field of Joshua the Beth-sheʹmite. 19 But God struck down the men of Beth-sheʹmesh, because they had looked upon the Ark of Jehovah. He struck down 50,070 among the people, and the people began mourning because Jehovah had struck them down with a great slaughter. 20 So the men of Beth-sheʹmesh asked: “Who will be able to stand before Jehovah, this holy God, and to whom will he go away from us?” 21 So they sent messengers to the inhabitants of Kirʹi·ath-jeʹa·rim, saying: “The Phi·lisʹtines have returned the Ark of Jehovah. Come down and take it up with you.”
7 So the men of Kirʹi·ath-jeʹa·rim came and took the Ark of Jehovah up into the house of A·binʹa·dab on the hill, and they sanctified his son El·e·aʹzar to guard the Ark of Jehovah.2 A long time elapsed, 20 years in all, from the day of the Ark’s coming to Kirʹi·ath-jeʹa·rim, and all the house of Israel began to seek after Jehovah. 3 Samuel then said to all the house of Israel: “If you are returning to Jehovah with all your heart, put away the foreign gods and the Ashʹto·reth images from among you, and direct your heart unswervingly to Jehovah and serve only him, and he will rescue you from the hand of the Phi·lisʹtines.” 4 At that the Israelites got rid of the Baʹals and the Ashʹto·reth images and served only Jehovah.5 Then Samuel said: “Gather all Israel together at Mizʹpah, and I will pray to Jehovah in your behalf.” 6 So they gathered together at Mizʹpah, and they drew water and poured it out before Jehovah and kept a fast on that day. There they said: “We have sinned against Jehovah.” And Samuel began serving as judge over the Israelites in Mizʹpah.7 When the Phi·lisʹtines heard that the Israelites had gathered together at Mizʹpah, the lords of the Phi·lisʹtines went up against Israel. When the Israelites heard of it, they were afraid because of the Phi·lisʹtines. 8 So the Israelites said to Samuel: “Do not stop calling to Jehovah our God to help us and to save us from the hand of the Phi·lisʹtines.” 9 Then Samuel took a suckling lamb and offered it up as a whole burnt offering to Jehovah; and Samuel called to Jehovah for help in behalf of Israel, and Jehovah answered him. 10 As Samuel was offering up the burnt offering, the Phi·lisʹtines advanced for battle against Israel. Jehovah now caused it to thunder loudly on that day against the Phi·lisʹtines, and He threw them into confusion, and they were defeated before Israel. 11 At that the men of Israel went out from Mizʹpah and pursued the Phi·lisʹtines, striking them down as far as south of Beth-car. 12 Then Samuel took a stone and set it between Mizʹpah and Jeshʹa·nah and named it Eb·en·eʹzer, for he said: “Until now Jehovah has helped us.” 13 Thus the Phi·lisʹtines were subdued, and they did not come again into the territory of Israel; and the hand of Jehovah continued against the Phi·lisʹtines all the days of Samuel. 14 Also, the cities that the Phi·lisʹtines had taken from Israel were returned to Israel, from Ekʹron to Gath, and Israel recovered their territory from the hand of the Phi·lisʹtines.There was also peace between Israel and the Amʹor·ites.15 Samuel kept on judging Israel throughout his life. 16 Each year he traveled in a circuit to Bethʹel, Gilʹgal, and Mizʹpah, and he judged Israel in all these places. 17 But he would return to Raʹmah, because his house was there, and there he also judged Israel. He built an altar there to Jehovah.
8 When Samuel had grown old, he appointed his sons as judges for Israel. 2 The name of his firstborn son was Joel, and the name of his second, A·biʹjah; they were judges in Beʹer-sheʹba. 3 But his sons did not walk in his ways; they were inclined to pursue dishonest profit, they accepted bribes, and they perverted justice.4 In time all the elders of Israel gathered together and came to Samuel at Raʹmah. 5 They said to him: “Look! You have grown old, but your sons are not walking in your ways. Now appoint for us a king to judge us like all the other nations.” 6 But it displeased Samuel when they said: “Give us a king to judge us.” Then Samuel prayed to Jehovah, 7 and Jehovah said to Samuel: “Listen to everything the people say to you; for it is not you whom they have rejected, but it is I whom they have rejected as their king. 8 They are doing just as they have done from the day I brought them up out of Egypt until this day; they keep forsaking me and serving other gods, and that is what they are doing to you. 9 Now listen to them. However, you should solemnly warn them; tell them what the king who rules over them will have the right to demand.”10 So Samuel told the people who were asking him for a king all the words of Jehovah. 11 He said: “This is what the king who rules over you will have the right to demand: He will take your sons and put them in his chariots and make them his horsemen, and some will have to run before his chariots. 12 And he will appoint for himself chiefs over thousands and chiefs over fifties, and some will do his plowing, reap his harvest, and make his weapons of war and equipment for his chariots. 13 He will take your daughters to be ointment mixers, cooks, and bakers. 14 He will take the best of your fields, your vineyards, and your olive groves, and he will give them to his servants. 15 He will take the tenth of your grainfields and your vineyards, and he will give it to his court officials and his servants. 16 And he will take your male and female servants, your best herds, and your donkeys, and he will use them for his work. 17 He will take the tenth of your flocks, and you will become his servants. 18 The day will come when you will cry out because of the king you have chosen for yourselves, but Jehovah will not answer you in that day.”19 However, the people refused to listen to what Samuel told them, and they said: “No, we are determined to have a king over us. 20 Then we will be like all the other nations, and our king will judge us and lead us and fight our battles.” 21 After Samuel heard all the words of the people, he repeated them in the hearing of Jehovah. 22 Jehovah said to Samuel: “Listen to them, and appoint a king to reign over them.” Samuel then said to the men of Israel: “Each of you should return to his city.”
9 There was a man of Benjamin named Kish, the son of A·biʹel, the son of Zeʹror son of Be·coʹrath son of A·phiʹah, a Benʹja·min·ite and a very wealthy man. 2 He had a son named Saul, who was young and handsome—there was no man among the Israelites more handsome than he—and he stood head and shoulders taller than all the people.3 When the donkeys belonging to Saul’s father Kish got lost, Kish said to his son Saul: “Please take with you one of the attendants and go look for the donkeys.” 4 They passed through the mountainous region of Eʹphra·im and through the land of Shalʹi·shah, and they did not find them. They traveled through the land of Shaʹa·lim, but the donkeys were not there. They passed through the entire land of the Benʹja·min·ites, and they did not find them.5 They came into the land of Zuph, and Saul said to his attendant who was with him: “Come, let us return, so that my father does not start worrying about us rather than the donkeys.” 6 But the attendant replied: “Look, there is a man of God in this city, a man who is held in honor. All that he says is sure to come true. Let us go there now. Perhaps he can tell us which way to go.” 7 At this Saul said to his attendant: “If we go, what can we take to the man? There is no bread in our bags; there is nothing to take as a gift to the man of the true God. What do we have?” 8 So the attendant answered Saul again: “Look! There is a quarter of a shekel of silver in my hand. I will give it to the man of the true God, and he will tell us which way to go.” 9 (In former times in Israel, this was what a man would say when going to seek God: “Come, and let us go to the seer.” For the prophet of today used to be called a seer in former times.) 10 Then Saul said to his attendant: “What you said is good. Let us go.” So they went to the city where the man of the true God was.11 While they were going up the ascent to the city, they met girls going out to draw water. So they said to them: “Is the seer in this place?” 12 They answered: “He is. Look, he is just ahead of you. Hurry now, for today he has come to the city, because the people are making a sacrifice today on the high place. 13 As soon as you come into the city, you will find him before he goes up to the high place to eat. The people will not eat until he comes, for he is the one who blesses the sacrifice. Once that is done, those who are invited may eat. So now go up right away, and you will find him.” 14 So they went up to the city. As they were coming into the middle of the city, there was Samuel coming out to meet them to go up to the high place.15 The day before Saul came, Jehovah had told Samuel: 16 “Tomorrow about this time, I will send to you a man from the land of Benjamin. You must anoint him as leader over my people Israel, and he will save my people from the hand of the Phi·lisʹtines. For I have seen the affliction of my people, and their outcry has reached me.” 17 When Samuel saw Saul, Jehovah told him: “Here is the man of whom I said to you, ‘This is the one who will govern my people.’”18 Then Saul approached Samuel in the middle of the gate and said: “Tell me, please, where is the house of the seer?” 19 Samuel answered Saul: “I am the seer. Go up ahead of me to the high place, and you will eat with me today. I will send you away in the morning, and I will tell you all that you want to know. 20 As for the donkeys that were lost three days ago, do not worry about them, for they have been found. And to whom does all that is desirable of Israel belong? Is it not to you and to the whole house of your father?” 21 At this Saul answered: “Am I not a Benʹja·min·ite of the smallest of the tribes of Israel, and my family the most insignificant of all the families of the tribe of Benjamin? So why have you spoken to me in this way?”22 Then Samuel took Saul and his attendant and brought them to the dining hall and gave them a place at the head of those invited; there were about 30 men. 23 Samuel said to the cook: “Bring the portion that I gave you and told you, ‘Set it aside.’” 24 At that the cook lifted up the leg and what was on it, and set it before Saul. And Samuel said: “What has been reserved has been set before you. Eat, because they have reserved it for you for this occasion. For I told them, ‘I invited guests.’” So Saul ate with Samuel on that day. 25 Then they went down from the high place to the city, and he continued to speak with Saul on the housetop. 26 They rose early, and at daybreak Samuel called to Saul on the housetop, saying: “Get ready, so that I may send you away.” So Saul got ready and both he and Samuel went outside. 27 While they were descending toward the outskirts of the city, Samuel said to Saul: “Tell the attendant to go on ahead of us,” so he went on ahead. “But you, stand still now, so that I may let you hear the word of God.”
1 Now there was a man of Ra·math·aʹim-zoʹphim of the mountainous region of Eʹphra·im whose name was El·kaʹnah, the son of Je·roʹham, the son of E·liʹhu, the son of Toʹhu, the son of Zuph, an Eʹphra·im·ite. 2 He had two wives; one was named Hanʹnah, and the other was named Pe·ninʹnah. Pe·ninʹnah had children, but Hanʹnah had no children. 3 That man went up from his city year after year to worship and to sacrifice to Jehovah of armies in Shiʹloh. That is where the two sons of Eʹli, Hophʹni and Phinʹe·has, served as priests to Jehovah.4 One day when El·kaʹnah offered a sacrifice, he gave portions to his wife Pe·ninʹnah as well as to all her sons and her daughters, 5 but to Hanʹnah he gave a special portion, because Hanʹnah was the one he loved; but Jehovah had not given her children. 6 Moreover, her rival wife taunted her relentlessly in order to upset her because Jehovah had not given her children. 7 That is what she would do year after year; whenever Hanʹnah went up to the house of Jehovah, her rival would taunt her so much that she would weep and not eat. 8 But her husband El·kaʹnah said to her: “Hanʹnah, why do you weep, and why do you not eat, and why are you so sad? Am I not better to you than ten sons?”9 Then Hanʹnah got up after they had finished eating and drinking in Shiʹloh. At the time, Eʹli the priest was sitting on the seat by the doorpost of the temple of Jehovah. 10 Hanʹnah was extremely bitter, and she began to pray to Jehovah and to weep uncontrollably. 11 And she made this vow: “O Jehovah of armies, if you look upon the affliction of your servant and remember me and you do not forget your servant and give to your servant a male child, I will give him to Jehovah all the days of his life, and no razor will touch his head.”12 While she prayed for a long time before Jehovah, Eʹli was watching her mouth. 13 Hanʹnah was speaking in her heart, only her lips were trembling, but her voice was not heard. So Eʹli thought she was drunk. 14 Eʹli said to her: “How long will you stay drunk? Stop drinking your wine.” 15 At this Hanʹnah answered: “No, my lord! I am a woman under great stress; I have not drunk wine or anything alcoholic, but I am pouring out my soul before Jehovah. 16 Do not take your servant for a worthless woman, for I have been speaking until now out of my great anguish and distress.” 17 Then Eʹli answered: “Go in peace, and may the God of Israel grant your petition that you have asked of him.” 18 To this she said: “Let your servant find favor in your eyes.” And the woman went on her way and ate, and her face was no longer downcast.19 Then they got up early in the morning and bowed before Jehovah, after which they returned to their house in Raʹmah. El·kaʹnah had sexual relations with his wife Hanʹnah, and Jehovah gave attention to her. 20 Within a year Hanʹnah became pregnant and gave birth to a son and named him Samuel, because, as she said, “it is from Jehovah that I have asked him.”21 In time El·kaʹnah went up with all his household to offer the yearly sacrifice to Jehovah and to present his vow offering. 22 But Hanʹnah did not go up, for she said to her husband: “As soon as the boy is weaned, I will bring him; then he will appear before Jehovah and remain there from then on.” 23 El·kaʹnah her husband then said to her: “Do what you think is best. Stay at home until you wean him. May Jehovah carry out what you have said.” So the woman stayed at home and nursed her son until she weaned him.24 As soon as she had weaned him, she took him up to Shiʹloh, along with a three-year-old bull, one eʹphah of flour, and a large jar of wine, and she came to the house of Jehovah in Shiʹloh and brought the young boy with her. 25 Then they slaughtered the bull and brought the boy to Eʹli. 26 With that she said: “Pardon me, my lord! As surely as you live, my lord, I am the woman who was standing with you in this place to pray to Jehovah. 27 It was for this boy that I prayed, and Jehovah granted my petition that I asked of him. 28 I, in turn, now lend him to Jehovah. For all his days, he is lent to Jehovah.”And he bowed down there to Jehovah.
10 Later the king of the Amʹmon·ites died, and his son Haʹnun became king in his place. 2 At that David said: “I will show loyal love toward Haʹnun the son of Naʹhash as his father showed loyal love toward me.” So David sent his servants to offer him comfort over the loss of his father. But when David’s servants came into the land of the Amʹmon·ites, 3 the princes of the Amʹmon·ites said to Haʹnun their lord: “Do you think that David is honoring your father by sending comforters to you? Is it not to search through the city and to spy it out and to overthrow it that David has sent his servants to you?” 4 So Haʹnun took the servants of David and shaved off half their beards and cut their garments in half at their buttocks and sent them away. 5 When David was told, he at once sent men to meet them, because the men had been deeply humiliated; and the king told them: “Stay in Jerʹi·cho until your beards grow back, and then return.”6 In time the Amʹmon·ites saw that they had become a stench to David, so the Amʹmon·ites sent and hired Syrians of Beth-reʹhob and Syrians of Zoʹbah, 20,000 foot soldiers; and the king of Maʹa·cah, with 1,000 men; and from Ishʹtob, 12,000 men. 7 When David heard about it, he sent Joʹab and the entire army, including his mightiest warriors. 8 And the Amʹmon·ites went out and drew up in battle formation at the entrance of the city gate while the Syrians of Zoʹbah and of Reʹhob, along with Ishʹtob and Maʹa·cah, were by themselves in the open field.9 When Joʹab saw that the battle charges were coming against him from the front and the rear, he chose some of the best troops in Israel and drew them up in battle formation to meet the Syrians. 10 He put the rest of the men under the command of his brother A·bishʹai, in order to draw them up in battle formation to meet the Amʹmon·ites. 11 Then he said: “If the Syrians become too strong for me, then you must come to my rescue; but if the Amʹmon·ites become too strong for you, I will come to your rescue. 12 We must be strong and courageous for our people and for the cities of our God, and Jehovah will do what is good in his eyes.”13 Then Joʹab and his men advanced to meet the Syrians in battle, and they fled from before him. 14 When the Amʹmon·ites saw that the Syrians had fled, they fled from A·bishʹai and went into the city. After that Joʹab returned from the Amʹmon·ites and came to Jerusalem.15 When the Syrians saw that they had been defeated by Israel, they regrouped. 16 So Had·ad·eʹzer sent for the Syrians in the region of the River, and then they came to Heʹlam, with Shoʹbach the chief of the army of Had·ad·eʹzer leading them.17 When the report was made to David, he immediately gathered all Israel and crossed the Jordan and came to Heʹlam. The Syrians then drew up in battle formation to meet David and fought against him. 18 But the Syrians fled from Israel; and David killed 700 charioteers and 40,000 horsemen of the Syrians, and he struck down Shoʹbach the chief of their army, who died there. 19 When all the kings, the servants of Had·ad·eʹzer, saw that they had been defeated by Israel, they promptly made peace with Israel and became their subjects; and the Syrians were afraid to help the Amʹmon·ites anymore.
11 At the start of the year, at the time when kings go on campaigns, David sent Joʹab and his servants and the entire army of Israel to bring the Amʹmon·ites to ruin, and they besieged Rabʹbah, while David stayed in Jerusalem.2 One evening David got up from his bed and walked around on the rooftop of the king’s house. From the rooftop he saw a woman bathing, and the woman was very beautiful. 3 David sent someone to inquire about the woman, and he reported: “Is this not Bath-sheʹba the daughter of E·liʹam and the wife of U·riʹah the Hitʹtite?” 4 Then David sent messengers to bring her. So she came in to him, and he lay down with her. (This happened while she was purifying herself from her uncleanness.) Afterward, she returned to her house.5 The woman became pregnant, and she sent a message to David: “I am pregnant.” 6 At this David sent a message to Joʹab: “Send to me U·riʹah the Hitʹtite.” So Joʹab sent U·riʹah to David. 7 When U·riʹah came to him, David asked him how Joʹab was getting along, how the troops were getting along, and how the war was going. 8 David then said to U·riʹah: “Go down to your house and relax.” When U·riʹah left the king’s house, the king’s courtesy gift was sent after him. 9 However, U·riʹah slept at the entrance of the king’s house with all the other servants of his lord, and he did not go down to his own house. 10 So David was told: “U·riʹah did not go down to his own house.” At that David said to U·riʹah: “Have you not just returned from a journey? Why did you not go down to your own house?” 11 U·riʹah replied to David: “The Ark and Israel and Judah are dwelling in temporary shelters, and my lord Joʹab and the servants of my lord are camping in the open field. So should I go into my own house to eat and drink and lie down with my wife? As surely as you live and are alive, I will not do this thing!”12 Then David said to U·riʹah: “Stay here also today, and tomorrow I will send you away.” So U·riʹah stayed in Jerusalem on that day and the following day. 13 David then sent for him to come and eat and drink with him, and he got him drunk. But in the evening, he went out to sleep on his bed with the servants of his lord, and he did not go down to his house. 14 In the morning David wrote a letter to Joʹab and sent it by the hand of U·riʹah. 15 He wrote in the letter: “Put U·riʹah in the front lines where the fighting is fiercest. Then retreat from behind him, so that he will be struck down and die.”16 Joʹab had been carefully watching the city, and he stationed U·riʹah where he knew there were mighty warriors. 17 When the men of the city came out and fought against Joʹab, some of David’s servants fell, and U·riʹah the Hitʹtite was among those who died. 18 Joʹab now reported to David all the news about the war. 19 He instructed the messenger: “When you finish speaking to the king about all the news of the war, 20 the king may become angry and say to you, ‘Why did you have to go so near to the city to fight? Did you not know that they would shoot from the top of the wall? 21 Who struck down A·bimʹe·lech the son of Je·rubʹbe·sheth? Was it not a woman who threw an upper millstone on him from the top of the wall, causing his death at Theʹbez? Why did you have to go so close to the wall?’ Then say, ‘Your servant U·riʹah the Hitʹtite also died.’”22 So the messenger went and told David everything that Joʹab had sent him to tell. 23 Then the messenger told David: “Their men overpowered us, and they came out against us in the field; but we drove them back to the entrance of the city gate. 24 And the archers were shooting at your servants from the top of the wall, and some of the servants of the king died; your servant U·riʹah the Hitʹtite also died.” 25 At that David said to the messenger: “Say this to Joʹab: ‘Do not let this matter trouble you, for the sword devours one as well as another. Intensify your battle against the city and conquer it.’ And encourage him.”26 When U·riʹah’s wife heard that her husband U·riʹah had died, she began to mourn her husband. 27 As soon as the mourning period was over, David sent for her and brought her to his house, and she became his wife and bore him a son. But what David had done was very displeasing to Jehovah.
12 So Jehovah sent Nathan to David. He came in to him and said: “There were two men in one city, the one rich and the other poor. 2 The rich man had very many sheep and cattle; 3 but the poor man had nothing but one small female lamb, which he had bought. He cared for it, and it grew up together with him and his sons. It would eat from the little food he had and drink from his cup and sleep in his arms. It became as a daughter to him. 4 Later a visitor came to the rich man, but he would not take any of his own sheep and cattle to prepare a meal for the traveler who had come to him. Instead, he took the poor man’s lamb and prepared it for the man who had come to him.”5 At this David grew very angry against the man, and he said to Nathan: “As surely as Jehovah is living, the man who did this deserves to die! 6 And he should pay for the lamb four times over, because he did this and showed no compassion.”7 Then Nathan said to David: “You are the man! This is what Jehovah the God of Israel says: ‘I myself anointed you as king over Israel, and I rescued you from the hand of Saul. 8 I was willing to give you your master’s house and put your master’s wives in your arms, and I gave you the house of Israel and of Judah. And as if that were not enough, I was willing to do much more for you. 9 Why did you despise the word of Jehovah by doing what is bad in his eyes? You struck down U·riʹah the Hitʹtite with the sword! Then you took his wife as your wife after you killed him by the sword of the Amʹmon·ites. 10 Now a sword will never depart from your own house, because you despised me by taking the wife of U·riʹah the Hitʹtite as your wife.’ 11 This is what Jehovah says: ‘Here I am bringing against you calamity from within your own house; and before your own eyes, I will take your wives and give them to another man, and he will lie down with your wives in broad daylight. 12 Although you acted in secret, I will do this in front of all Israel and in broad daylight.’”13 David then said to Nathan: “I have sinned against Jehovah.” Nathan replied to David: “Jehovah, in turn, forgives your sin. You will not die. 14 Nevertheless, because you have treated Jehovah with utter disrespect in this matter, the son just born to you will certainly die.”15 Then Nathan went to his own house.And Jehovah struck the child whom U·riʹah’s wife had borne to David, and he became sick. 16 David pleaded with the true God in behalf of the boy. David went on a strict fast and would go in and spend the night lying on the ground. 17 So the elders of his house stood over him and tried to raise him up from the ground, but he refused and would not eat with them. 18 On the seventh day the child died, but David’s servants were afraid to tell him that the child was dead. They said: “While the child was alive we spoke to him, and he did not listen to us. So how can we tell him that the child has died? He may do something terrible.”19 When David saw that his servants were whispering to one another, he discerned that the child had died. David said to his servants: “Has the child died?” They replied: “He has died.” 20 So David got up from the ground. He washed, rubbed himself with oil, changed his clothing, and went to the house of Jehovah and prostrated himself. Afterward, he went to his house and asked for food to be brought to him, and he ate. 21 His servants asked him: “Why have you acted in this way? While the child was alive, you fasted and kept weeping; but as soon as the child died, you got up and ate food.” 22 He replied: “While the child was alive, I fasted and kept weeping because I said to myself, ‘Who knows whether Jehovah may show me favor and let the child live?’ 23 Now that he has died, why should I fast? Can I bring him back? I will go to him, but he will not return to me.”24 Then David comforted his wife Bath-sheʹba. He went in to her and lay down with her. In time she bore a son, and he was named Solʹo·mon. And Jehovah loved him, 25 and he sent word through Nathan the prophet to name him Jed·i·diʹah, for the sake of Jehovah.26 Joʹab continued fighting against Rabʹbah of the Amʹmon·ites, and he captured the royal city. 27 So Joʹab sent messengers to David and said: “I have fought against Rabʹbah, and I have captured the city of waters. 28 Now gather the rest of the troops and encamp against the city and capture it. Otherwise, I will be the one to capture the city, and it will be credited to me.”29 So David gathered all the troops and went to Rabʹbah and fought against it and captured it. 30 Then he took the crown of Malʹcam from its head. The weight of it was a talent of gold, along with precious stones, and it was placed on David’s head. He also took a vast amount of spoil from the city. 31 And he brought out the people who were in it and put them to work at sawing stones, at working with sharp iron instruments and with iron axes, and at brickmaking. That was what he did to all the cities of the Amʹmon·ites. Finally David and all the troops returned to Jerusalem.
13 Now David’s son Abʹsa·lom had a beautiful sister named Taʹmar, and David’s son Amʹnon fell in love with her. 2 Amʹnon was so distressed that he became sick because of his sister Taʹmar, for she was a virgin and it seemed impossible for Amʹnon to do anything to her. 3 Now Amʹnon had a companion named Je·honʹa·dab, the son of Shimʹe·ah, David’s brother; and Je·honʹa·dab was a very clever man. 4 So he said to him: “Why are you, the king’s son, so depressed every morning? Why not tell me?” Amʹnon replied to him: “I am in love with Taʹmar, the sister of my brother Abʹsa·lom.” 5 Je·honʹa·dab replied to him: “Lie down on your bed and pretend to be sick. When your father comes to see you, say to him, ‘Please, let my sister Taʹmar come and serve me some food. If she prepares the food given to the sick before my eyes, I will eat it from her hand.’”6 So Amʹnon lay down and pretended to be sick, and the king came in to see him. Then Amʹnon said to the king: “Please, let my sister Taʹmar come in and bake two heart-shaped cakes before my eyes so that I may take food from her hand.” 7 At that David sent a message to Taʹmar at the house, saying: “Please go to the house of your brother Amʹnon and prepare food for him.” 8 So Taʹmar went to the house of her brother Amʹnon, where he was lying down. She took the dough and kneaded it into cakes before his eyes and cooked the cakes. 9 Then she took the pan and served him. But Amʹnon refused to eat and said: “Have everybody leave me!” So everybody left him.10 Amʹnon now said to Taʹmar: “Bring the food into the bedroom, so that I may eat it from your hand.” So Taʹmar took the heart-shaped cakes that she had made and brought them to her brother Amʹnon in the bedroom. 11 When she brought them for him to eat, he grabbed her and said: “Come, lie down with me, my sister.” 12 But she said to him: “No, my brother! Do not humiliate me, for such a thing is not done in Israel. Do not do this disgraceful thing. 13 How could I live down my shame? And you will be regarded as one of the disgraceful men in Israel. Now speak, please, to the king, for he will not withhold me from you.” 14 But he refused to listen to her, and he overpowered her and humiliated her by raping her. 15 Then Amʹnon began hating her with a very intense hatred, so that his hatred for her became greater than the love he had felt for her. Amʹnon said to her: “Get up; go away!” 16 At this she said to him: “No, my brother, for sending me away now is worse than what you have done with me!” But he refused to listen to her.17 With that he called his young attendant and said: “Get this person out of my presence, please, and lock the door behind her.” 18 (Now she was wearing a special robe, for those were the garments that the virgin daughters of the king wore.) So his attendant led her outside, and he locked the door behind her. 19 Then Taʹmar put ashes on her head, and she ripped apart the fine robe she was wearing; and she kept her hands on her head and walked off, crying out as she walked.20 At this her brother Abʹsa·lom asked her: “Was it your brother Amʹnon who was with you? And now keep silent, my sister. He is your brother. Do not let your heart dwell on this matter.” Then Taʹmar lived in isolation at the house of her brother Abʹsa·lom. 21 When King David heard about all these things, he became very angry. But he would not hurt the feelings of Amʹnon his son, because he loved him, for he was his firstborn. 22 And Abʹsa·lom said nothing to Amʹnon, either bad or good; for Abʹsa·lom hated Amʹnon because he had humiliated his sister Taʹmar.23 After two full years, Abʹsa·lom’s sheepshearers were at Baʹal-haʹzor, near Eʹphra·im, and Abʹsa·lom invited all the sons of the king. 24 So Abʹsa·lom came in to the king and said: “Your servant is having his sheep sheared. Please let the king and his servants go with me.” 25 But the king said to Abʹsa·lom: “No, my son. If all of us go, we will be a burden to you.” Although he kept urging him, he did not consent to go, but he blessed him. 26 Abʹsa·lom then said: “If not you, please let my brother Amʹnon go with us.” The king replied to him: “Why should he go with you?” 27 But Abʹsa·lom urged him, so he sent Amʹnon and all the king’s sons with him.28 Then Abʹsa·lom ordered his attendants: “Watch, and when Amʹnon’s heart is in a cheerful mood from the wine, I will say to you, ‘Strike down Amʹnon!’ You must then put him to death. Do not be afraid. Is it not I who command you? Be strong and courageous.” 29 So Abʹsa·lom’s attendants did to Amʹnon exactly as Abʹsa·lom had ordered; then all the other sons of the king got up, and each one mounted his mule and fled. 30 While they were on the way, the report reached David: “Abʹsa·lom has struck down all the sons of the king, and not one of them survived.” 31 At this the king got up and ripped his clothes apart and lay on the ground, and all his servants were standing by with their garments ripped apart.32 However, Je·honʹa·dab the son of Shimʹe·ah, David’s brother, said: “Do not let my lord think that they have killed all the young sons of the king, for only Amʹnon has died. This is by the order of Abʹsa·lom, who decided to do this from the day that Amʹnon humiliated his sister Taʹmar. 33 Now do not let my lord the king pay attention to the report that says, ‘All the king’s sons have died’; only Amʹnon has died.”34 Meanwhile, Abʹsa·lom ran away. Later the watchman raised his eyes and saw that there were many people coming from the road behind him next to the mountain. 35 At this Je·honʹa·dab said to the king: “Look! The king’s sons have returned. It is just as your servant said.” 36 As he finished speaking, the king’s sons came in, weeping loudly; also the king and all his servants wept very bitterly. 37 But Abʹsa·lom fled and went to Talʹmai the son of Am·miʹhud the king of Geshʹur. David mourned his son for many days. 38 After Abʹsa·lom fled and went to Geshʹur, he stayed there for three years.39 Finally King David longed to go to Abʹsa·lom, for he had become reconciled to the death of Amʹnon.
14 Now Joʹab the son of Ze·ruʹiah learned that the king’s heart longed for Abʹsa·lom. 2 So Joʹab sent to Te·koʹa and summoned from there a clever woman and told her: “Act like you are in mourning, please, and put on garments of mourning, and do not rub yourself with oil. Behave like a woman who has been mourning over someone dead for a long time. 3 Then go in and speak to the king like this.” With that Joʹab put the words in her mouth.4 The Te·koʹite woman went in to the king and fell with her face to the ground and prostrated herself and said: “Help me, O king!” 5 The king replied to her: “What is the matter?” To this she said: “Alas, I am a widow; my husband is dead. 6 And I, your servant, had two sons, and the two of them fought with each other in the field. There was no one to separate them, and one struck the other down and killed him. 7 Now the whole family has risen up against me, your servant, and they are saying, ‘Hand over the one who struck his brother, so that we may put him to death for the life of his brother whom he killed, even if it means wiping out the heir!’ They would extinguish the last glowing coal that I have left and leave to my husband neither a name nor a survivor on the surface of the earth.”8 Then the king said to the woman: “Go to your home, and I will issue an order regarding you.” 9 At this the Te·koʹite woman said to the king: “O my lord the king, let the guilt be on me and on my father’s house, while the king and his throne are innocent.” 10 The king then said: “If anyone speaks further to you, bring him to me, and he will never trouble you again.” 11 But she said: “Please, let the king remember Jehovah your God, so that the avenger of blood does not bring ruin and annihilate my son.” To this he said: “As surely as Jehovah is living, not one of your son’s hairs will fall to the ground.” 12 The woman now said: “Let your servant, please, speak a word to my lord the king.” So he said: “Speak!”13 The woman said: “Why, then, have you thought to do something like this against the people of God? When the king speaks this way, he makes himself guilty, for the king does not bring back his own banished son. 14 We will surely die and be like waters that are poured out on the ground, which cannot be recovered. But God would not take away a life, and he considers reasons why the banished one should not always be banished from him. 15 I have come in to say this to my lord the king because the people made me afraid. So your servant said, ‘Let me speak, please, to the king. Perhaps the king will act on the request of his slave. 16 The king may listen and rescue his slave from the hand of the man seeking to annihilate me and my only son from the inheritance God gave us.’ 17 Then your servant said, ‘May the word of my lord the king please give me relief,’ for my lord the king is just like an angel of the true God in distinguishing what is good from what is bad. May Jehovah your God be with you.”18 The king now answered the woman: “Please do not hide from me anything I ask you.” The woman replied: “Let my lord the king speak, please.” 19 The king then asked: “Did Joʹab put you up to all of this?” The woman answered: “As surely as you are living, O my lord the king, it is just as my lord the king says, for it was your servant Joʹab who instructed me and put all these words in the mouth of your servant. 20 Your servant Joʹab has done this to change the appearance of things, but my lord has wisdom like that of the angel of the true God and knows all that is happening in the land.”21 The king then said to Joʹab: “All right, I will do this thing. Go and bring back the young man Abʹsa·lom.” 22 At this Joʹab fell with his face to the ground and prostrated himself and praised the king. Joʹab said: “Today your servant knows that I have found favor in your eyes, O my lord the king, because the king has acted on the request of his servant.” 23 Then Joʹab got up and went to Geshʹur and brought Abʹsa·lom to Jerusalem. 24 However, the king said: “Let him return to his own house, but he may not see my face.” So Abʹsa·lom returned to his own house, and he did not see the face of the king.25 Now in all Israel, no man was as highly praised for his handsome appearance as Abʹsa·lom. From the sole of his foot to the crown of his head, there was no flaw in him. 26 When he shaved his head—he had to shave it at the end of every year because it was so heavy for him—the hair of his head weighed 200 shekels by the royal stone weight. 27 To Abʹsa·lom were born three sons and one daughter, whose name was Taʹmar. She was a very beautiful woman.28 And Abʹsa·lom continued living in Jerusalem for two full years, but he did not see the face of the king. 29 So Abʹsa·lom summoned Joʹab in order to send him to the king, but Joʹab would not come to him. Then he sent for him again, a second time, and he still refused to come. 30 Finally he said to his servants: “Joʹab’s plot of land is next to mine, and he has some barley there. Go and set it on fire.” So the servants of Abʹsa·lom set the plot of land on fire. 31 At this Joʹab got up and came to Abʹsa·lom’s house and said to him: “Why did your servants set my plot of land on fire?” 32 Abʹsa·lom replied to Joʹab: “Look! I sent this message to you, ‘Come and let me send you to the king to ask: “Why have I come from Geshʹur? It would have been better for me to stay there. Now let me see the face of the king, and if there is guilt in me, then he should put me to death.”’”33 So Joʹab went in to the king and told him. Then he called Abʹsa·lom, who came in to the king and prostrated himself before him, falling with his face to the ground before the king. Then the king kissed Abʹsa·lom.
15 After all these things, Abʹsa·lom acquired for himself a chariot and horses and 50 men to run before him. 2 Abʹsa·lom would rise up early and stand at the side of the road to the city gate. Whenever any man had a legal case that was to come to the king for judgment, Abʹsa·lom would call him and say: “From what city are you?” and he would say: “Your servant is from one of the tribes of Israel.” 3 Abʹsa·lom would say to him: “See, your claims are right and proper, but there is no one from the king to hear your case.” 4 Abʹsa·lom would say: “If only I were appointed judge in the land! Then every man who has a legal case or judgment could come to me, and I would see that he receives justice.”5 And when a man came near to bow down to him, Abʹsa·lom would extend his hand and grab hold of him and kiss him. 6 Abʹsa·lom would do this to all the Israelites who would come in to the king for judgment; so Abʹsa·lom kept stealing the hearts of the men of Israel.7 At the end of four years, Abʹsa·lom said to the king: “Let me go, please, to Hebʹron to pay my vow that I made to Jehovah. 8 For your servant made this solemn vow when I was dwelling in Geshʹur in Syria: ‘If Jehovah will bring me back to Jerusalem, I will make an offering to Jehovah.’” 9 So the king said to him: “Go in peace.” With that he rose up and went to Hebʹron.10 Abʹsa·lom now sent spies through all the tribes of Israel, saying: “As soon as you hear the sound of the horn, announce, ‘Abʹsa·lom has become king in Hebʹron!’” 11 Now 200 men from Jerusalem had gone there with Abʹsa·lom; they were invited and went unsuspectingly, unaware of what was happening. 12 Further, when he offered the sacrifices, Abʹsa·lom sent for A·hithʹo·phel the Giʹlon·ite, David’s adviser, from his city Giʹloh. The conspiracy kept gaining momentum, and the people who supported Abʹsa·lom were growing in number.13 In time an informer came to David, saying: “The heart of the men of Israel has turned to Abʹsa·lom.” 14 At once David said to all his servants with him in Jerusalem: “Get up, and let us run away, for none of us will escape from Abʹsa·lom! Hurry, for fear he may quickly overtake us and bring disaster on us and strike the city with the sword!” 15 The king’s servants replied to the king: “Whatever my lord the king decides, your servants are ready to do.” 16 So the king went out with all his household following him, but the king left ten concubines to take care of the house. 17 And the king continued on his way out with all the people following, and they stopped at Beth-merʹhak.18 All his servants leaving with him and all the Cherʹe·thites, the Pelʹe·thites, and the Gitʹtites, 600 men who had followed him from Gath, were passing by as the king reviewed them. 19 Then the king said to Itʹtai the Gitʹtite: “Why should you also go with us? Go back and dwell with the new king, for you are a foreigner and also an exile from your place. 20 Yesterday you came, so today should I make you wander with us, to go when I must go and where I must go? Go back and take your brothers with you, and may Jehovah show you loyal love and faithfulness!” 21 But Itʹtai answered the king: “As surely as Jehovah is living and as surely as my lord the king is living, wherever my lord the king may be, whether for death or for life, there your servant will be!” 22 At that David said to Itʹtai: “Go and cross over.” So Itʹtai the Gitʹtite crossed over, together with all his men and children.23 Everyone in the land was weeping loudly while all these people crossed over, and the king was standing by the Kidʹron Valley; all the people were crossing over to the road leading to the wilderness. 24 Zaʹdok was also there and with him were all the Levites carrying the ark of the covenant of the true God; and they set the Ark of the true God down; and A·biʹa·thar went up, while all the people completed crossing over from the city. 25 But the king said to Zaʹdok: “Take the Ark of the true God back to the city. If I find favor in the eyes of Jehovah, he will also bring me back and let me see it and its dwelling place. 26 But if he should say, ‘I have found no pleasure in you,’ then let him do to me whatever seems good in his eyes.” 27 The king said to Zaʹdok the priest: “Are you not a seer? Return to the city in peace, and take the two sons of you men with you, A·himʹa·az your own son and Jonʹa·than the son of A·biʹa·thar. 28 See, I will linger by the fords of the wilderness until word comes from you to inform me.” 29 So Zaʹdok and A·biʹa·thar took the Ark of the true God back to Jerusalem, and they remained there.30 As David was going up the Mount of Olives, he was weeping as he went up; his head was covered, and he was walking barefoot. All the people with him also covered their heads and were weeping as they went up. 31 David was then told: “A·hithʹo·phel is among those conspiring with Abʹsa·lom.” At this David said: “Turn, please, the advice of A·hithʹo·phel into foolishness, O Jehovah!”32 When David came to the summit where people used to bow down to God, Huʹshai the Arʹchite was there to meet him, with his robe ripped apart and dirt on his head. 33 However, David said to him: “If you go across with me, you will be a load on me. 34 But if you return to the city and you say to Abʹsa·lom, ‘I am your servant, O King. I was the servant of your father in the past, but now I am your servant,’ you can then frustrate the advice of A·hithʹo·phel for me. 35 Are not Zaʹdok and A·biʹa·thar the priests there with you? You must tell Zaʹdok and A·biʹa·thar the priests everything that you hear from the house of the king. 36 Look! There with them are their two sons, A·himʹa·az the son of Zaʹdok and Jonʹa·than the son of A·biʹa·thar, and through them send to me everything that you hear.” 37 So Huʹshai, David’s friend, went into the city as Abʹsa·lom was entering into Jerusalem.
16 When David had passed a little beyond the summit, Ziʹba, the attendant of Me·phibʹo·sheth, was there to meet him with a couple of saddled donkeys, and on them were 200 loaves of bread, 100 cakes of raisins, 100 cakes of summer fruit, and a large jar of wine. 2 Then the king said to Ziʹba: “Why have you brought these things?” Ziʹba replied: “The donkeys are for the household of the king to ride, the bread and the summer fruit are for the young men to eat, and the wine is for those who get exhausted in the wilderness to drink.” 3 The king now said: “And where is the son of your master?” At this Ziʹba said to the king: “He is staying in Jerusalem, for he said, ‘Today the house of Israel will give back the royal rule of my father to me.’” 4 The king then said to Ziʹba: “Look! Everything that belongs to Me·phibʹo·sheth is yours.” Ziʹba replied: “I bow down before you. May I find favor in your eyes, my lord the king.”5 When King David reached Ba·huʹrim, a man of the family of Saul’s house named Shimʹe·i, the son of Geʹra, came out shouting curses as he approached. 6 He was throwing stones at David and at all the servants of King David, as well as at all the people and the mighty men on his right and on his left. 7 Shimʹe·i said as he cursed: “Get out, get out, you bloodguilty man! You worthless man! 8 Jehovah has brought back on you all the bloodguilt for the house of Saul, in whose place you have ruled as king, but Jehovah gives the kingship into the hand of Abʹsa·lom your son. Now calamity has overtaken you because you are a bloodguilty man!”9 Then A·bishʹai the son of Ze·ruʹiah said to the king: “Why should this dead dog curse my lord the king? Let me go over, please, and take off his head.” 10 But the king said: “What do I have to do with you, you sons of Ze·ruʹiah? Let him curse me, for Jehovah has said to him, ‘Curse David!’ So who should say, ‘Why are you doing this?’” 11 David then said to A·bishʹai and all his servants: “Here my own son, who came from my own body, is seeking my life, and how much more now a Benʹja·min·ite! Leave him alone so that he may curse me, for Jehovah told him to! 12 Perhaps Jehovah will see my affliction, and Jehovah will restore goodness to me instead of the curses shouted at me this day.” 13 With that David and his men kept going down the road while Shimʹe·i was walking alongside the mountain abreast of him, shouting curses and throwing stones and a lot of dust.14 At length the king and all the people with him arrived at their destination exhausted, and they refreshed themselves.15 Meanwhile, Abʹsa·lom and all the men of Israel arrived in Jerusalem, and A·hithʹo·phel was with him. 16 When Huʹshai the Arʹchite, David’s friend, came in to Abʹsa·lom, Huʹshai said to Abʹsa·lom: “Long live the king! Long live the king!” 17 At this Abʹsa·lom said to Huʹshai: “Is this your loyal love toward your friend? Why did you not go with your friend?” 18 So Huʹshai said to Abʹsa·lom: “No, I am on the side of the one who has been chosen by Jehovah, this people, and all the men of Israel. I will stay with him. 19 And again I say, Whom should I serve? Should it not be his son? Just as I served your father, so I will serve you.”20 Abʹsa·lom then said to A·hithʹo·phel: “Give me your advice. What should we do?” 21 At that A·hithʹo·phel said to Abʹsa·lom: “Have relations with your father’s concubines, those whom he left behind to take care of the house. Then all Israel will hear that you have made yourself a stench to your father, and those who support you will be strengthened.” 22 So they pitched a tent for Abʹsa·lom on the roof, and Abʹsa·lom had relations with the concubines of his father before the eyes of all Israel.23 In those days the advice that A·hithʹo·phel gave was considered as the word of the true God. That was how all the advice of A·hithʹo·phel was esteemed, both by David and by Abʹsa·lom.
17 A·hithʹo·phel then said to Abʹsa·lom: “Please let me choose 12,000 men and rise up and chase after David tonight. 2 I will come upon him when he is weary and powerless, and I will throw him into a panic; and all the people who are with him will flee, and I will strike down only the king. 3 Then I will bring all the people back to you. The return of all the people depends on what happens with the man you are seeking. Then all the people will be at peace.” 4 The proposal was just right in the eyes of Abʹsa·lom and all the elders of Israel.5 However, Abʹsa·lom said: “Please call Huʹshai the Arʹchite as well, and let us hear what he has to say.” 6 So Huʹshai came in to Abʹsa·lom. Then Abʹsa·lom said to him: “This is the advice A·hithʹo·phel gave. Should we act on his advice? If not, you tell us.” 7 At this Huʹshai said to Abʹsa·lom: “The advice that A·hithʹo·phel gave is not good in this instance!”8 Huʹshai continued: “You well know that your father and his men are mighty, and they are desperate, like a bear that has lost her cubs in the field. Moreover, your father is a warrior, and he will not spend the night with the people. 9 At this very moment he is hiding in one of the caves or in some other place; and if he attacks first, those hearing of it will say, ‘The people following Abʹsa·lom have been defeated!’ 10 Even the courageous man whose heart is like that of a lion will surely melt in fear, for all Israel knows that your father is a mighty man and that the men with him are courageous. 11 I give this advice: Let all Israel be gathered to you, from Dan to Beʹer-sheʹba, as many as the grains of sand by the sea, and you should lead them into the fight. 12 We will come against him wherever he is found, and we will come upon him just like the dew that falls on the ground; and not one of them will survive, not he nor any of the men with him. 13 If he retreats into a city, all Israel will carry ropes to that city, and we will drag it down into the valley until not even a pebble is left.”14 Then Abʹsa·lom and all the men of Israel said: “The advice of Huʹshai the Arʹchite is better than the advice of A·hithʹo·phel!” For Jehovah had determined to frustrate the sound advice of A·hithʹo·phel, so that Jehovah could bring disaster on Abʹsa·lom.15 Huʹshai later said to Zaʹdok and A·biʹa·thar the priests: “This is what A·hithʹo·phel has advised Abʹsa·lom and the elders of Israel, and this is what I have advised. 16 Now quickly send word to David and warn him: ‘Do not stay at the fords of the wilderness tonight, but cross over without fail, or the king and all the people with him may be wiped out.’”17 Jonʹa·than and A·himʹa·az were staying at En-roʹgel; so a servant girl went off and told them and they went to tell King David, for they did not dare to be seen entering the city. 18 However, a young man saw them and told Abʹsa·lom. So the two of them quickly went off and came to the house of a man in Ba·huʹrim who had a well in his courtyard. They went down into it, 19 and the man’s wife spread a covering over the top of the well and covered it with cracked grain; no one knew about it. 20 The servants of Abʹsa·lom came to the woman at her house and asked: “Where are A·himʹa·az and Jonʹa·than?” The woman replied: “They passed by toward the water.” Then the men searched for them but did not find them, so they returned to Jerusalem.21 After the men were gone, they came up out of the well and went and informed King David. They said to him: “Rise up and quickly cross the water, for this is what A·hithʹo·phel advised against you.” 22 Immediately David and all the people with him rose up and crossed the Jordan. By daybreak, there was no one left who had not crossed the Jordan.23 When A·hithʹo·phel saw that his advice had not been acted on, he saddled a donkey and went to his house in his hometown. After he gave instructions to his household, he hanged himself. So he died and was buried in the burial place of his forefathers.24 Meanwhile, David went to Ma·ha·naʹim, and Abʹsa·lom crossed the Jordan with all the men of Israel. 25 Abʹsa·lom put A·maʹsa in charge of the army in place of Joʹab; A·maʹsa was the son of a man named Ithʹra the Israelite, who had relations with Abʹi·gail the daughter of Naʹhash, the sister of Ze·ruʹiah, Joʹab’s mother. 26 Israel and Abʹsa·lom camped in the land of Gilʹe·ad.27 As soon as David came to Ma·ha·naʹim, Shoʹbi the son of Naʹhash from Rabʹbah of the Amʹmon·ites, Maʹchir the son of Amʹmi·el from Lo-deʹbar, and Bar·zilʹlai the Gilʹe·ad·ite from Ro·geʹlim 28 brought beds, basins, clay pots, wheat, barley, flour, roasted grain, broad beans, lentils, parched grain, 29 honey, butter, sheep, and cheese. They brought all of this out for David and the people with him to eat, for they said: “The people are hungry and tired and thirsty in the wilderness.”
18 Then David numbered the men who were with him and placed over them chiefs of thousands and chiefs of hundreds. 2 And David sent one third of the men under the command of Joʹab, one third under the command of Joʹab’s brother A·bishʹai the son of Ze·ruʹiah, and one third under the command of Itʹtai the Gitʹtite. The king then said to the men: “I will also go out with you.” 3 But they said: “You must not go out, for if we flee, they would not care about us; and if half of us would die, they would not care about us, because you are worth 10,000 of us. Therefore, it would be better if you would send us help from the city.” 4 The king said to them: “Whatever seems best to you, I will do.” So the king stood next to the city gate, and all the men went out by hundreds and by thousands. 5 Then the king gave Joʹab and A·bishʹai and Itʹtai this order: “Deal gently with the young man Abʹsa·lom for my sake.” All the men heard it when the king gave all the chiefs the order about Abʹsa·lom.6 The men went out to the field to meet Israel, and the battle took place in the forest of Eʹphra·im. 7 There the people of Israel were defeated by the servants of David, and a great slaughter took place on that day—20,000 men. 8 The battle spread through the whole region. Furthermore, the forest devoured more of the people than the sword did on that day.9 Abʹsa·lom eventually found himself facing the servants of David. Abʹsa·lom was riding on a mule, and the mule went under the thick branches of a large tree, and his head got entangled in the big tree, so that he was suspended in midair while the mule he had been riding kept going. 10 Then someone saw it and told Joʹab: “Look! I have seen Abʹsa·lom hanging in a big tree.” 11 Joʹab replied to the man who told him: “If you saw it, why did you not strike him down to the ground on the spot? Then I would have gladly given you ten pieces of silver and a belt.” 12 But the man said to Joʹab: “Even if I were handed 1,000 pieces of silver, I could not lift my hand against the king’s son, for we heard the king order you and A·bishʹai and Itʹtai, ‘Whoever you are, watch over the young man Abʹsa·lom.’ 13 If I had disobeyed and taken his life, it could never have remained hidden from the king, and you would not have protected me.” 14 To this Joʹab said: “I am not going to waste any more time with you!” So he took three spikes in his hand and drove them through the heart of Abʹsa·lom while he was still alive in the midst of the big tree. 15 Then ten attendants who carried Joʹab’s weapons came and struck Abʹsa·lom until he was dead. 16 Joʹab now blew the horn, and the men returned from chasing after Israel; Joʹab called for them to halt. 17 They took Abʹsa·lom and threw him into a big pit in the forest and piled up over him a very big heap of stones. And all Israel fled to their homes.18 Now Abʹsa·lom, while he was alive, had taken and set up for himself a pillar in the Valley of the King, for he said: “I have no son to preserve the memory of my name.” So he named the pillar after himself, and it is called Abʹsa·lom’s Monument to this day.19 A·himʹa·az the son of Zaʹdok said: “Let me run, please, and break the news to the king, for Jehovah has given him justice by freeing him from his enemies.” 20 But Joʹab said to him: “You will not be a bearer of news this day. You may break the news on another day, but today you will not break the news, because the king’s own son has died.” 21 Then Joʹab said to a Cushʹite: “Go, tell the king what you have seen.” At that the Cushʹite bowed to Joʹab and ran off. 22 A·himʹa·az the son of Zaʹdok said once again to Joʹab: “Whatever happens, please let me also run behind the Cushʹite.” However, Joʹab said: “Why should you run, my son, when there is no news for you to tell?” 23 Still he said: “Whatever happens, let me run.” So Joʹab said to him: “Run!” And A·himʹa·az ran by the way of the district of the Jordan, and he eventually overtook the Cushʹite.24 Now David was sitting between the two city gates, and the watchman went up to the roof of the gate by the wall. He looked up and saw a man running by himself. 25 So the watchman called out and told the king. The king said: “If he is by himself, he has news to tell.” As he came steadily nearer, 26 the watchman saw another man running. The watchman then called to the gatekeeper: “Look! Another man running by himself!” The king said: “This one is also bringing news.” 27 The watchman said: “I can see that the first man runs like A·himʹa·az the son of Zaʹdok,” so the king said: “He is a good man, and he comes with good news.” 28 A·himʹa·az then called out to the king: “All is well!” With that he bowed to the king with his face to the ground. Then he said: “May Jehovah your God be praised, who has surrendered the men who rebelled against my lord the king!”29 However, the king said: “Is everything all right with the young man Abʹsa·lom?” To this A·himʹa·az said: “I saw the great commotion when Joʹab sent the king’s servant and your servant, but I did not know what it was.” 30 So the king said: “Step aside, stand here.” At that he stepped aside and stood there.31 Then the Cushʹite arrived, and the Cushʹite said: “Let my lord the king accept this news: Today Jehovah has brought justice by freeing you from the hand of all those who rebelled against you.” 32 But the king said to the Cushʹite: “Is everything all right with the young man Abʹsa·lom?” To this the Cushʹite said: “May all the enemies of my lord the king and all those who rebelled against you to harm you become like the young man!”33 This disturbed the king, and he went up to the roof chamber over the gateway and wept, saying as he walked: “My son Abʹsa·lom, my son, my son Abʹsa·lom! If only I had died instead of you, Abʹsa·lom my son, my son!”
19 It was reported to Joʹab: “The king is weeping and mourning for Abʹsa·lom.” 2 So the victory on that day was turned into mourning for all the people, because they heard that the king was grieving over his son. 3 The people quietly returned to the city that day like people who are ashamed because they fled in the battle. 4 The king covered his face and kept crying out with a loud voice: “My son Abʹsa·lom! Abʹsa·lom my son, my son!”5 Then Joʹab went in to the king at the house and said: “Today you have put to shame all your servants who this day saved your life and the lives of your sons, your daughters, your wives, and your concubines. 6 You love those who hate you and hate those who love you, for you have made it clear today that your chiefs and servants mean nothing to you, because I am sure that if only Abʹsa·lom were alive today and the rest of us were dead, it would be all right with you. 7 Now get up, go out and reassure your servants, because by Jehovah I swear that if you do not go out, not a man will remain with you tonight. This will be worse for you than all the injury that has come upon you from your youth until now.” 8 So the king rose up and sat in the city gate, and all the people were informed: “Now the king is sitting in the gate.” Then all the people came before the king.But Israel had fled, each to his home. 9 All the people in all the tribes of Israel were disputing, saying: “The king saved us from our enemies, and he rescued us from the Phi·lisʹtines; but now he has fled the land because of Abʹsa·lom. 10 And Abʹsa·lom, whom we anointed over us, has died in the battle. So now, why are you doing nothing to bring the king back?”11 King David sent this message to Zaʹdok and A·biʹa·thar the priests: “Speak to the elders of Judah, saying, ‘Why should you be the last ones to bring the king back to his house, when the word of all Israel has come to the king at his house? 12 You are my brothers; you are my own bone and flesh. Why should you be the last ones to bring the king back?’ 13 And you should say to A·maʹsa, ‘Are you not my own bone and flesh? So may God do to me and add to it if you will not become my army chief from now on instead of Joʹab.’”14 So he won over the hearts of all the men of Judah as one man, and they sent word to the king: “Come back, you and all your servants.”15 The king started back and reached the Jordan, and the people of Judah came to Gilʹgal to meet the king and to escort him across the Jordan. 16 Then Shimʹe·i the son of Geʹra, the Benʹja·min·ite from Ba·huʹrim, hurried down with the men of Judah to meet King David, 17 and there were 1,000 men from Benjamin with him. Also Ziʹba, the attendant of the house of Saul, with his 15 sons and 20 servants, rushed down to the Jordan ahead of the king. 18 He crossed the ford to bring the king’s household across and to do whatever he desired. But Shimʹe·i the son of Geʹra fell down before the king when he was about to cross the Jordan. 19 He said to the king: “Do not let my lord hold me guilty, and do not remember the wrong your servant did on the day that my lord the king went out of Jerusalem. May the king not take it to heart, 20 for your servant well knows that I have sinned; so today I have been the first of all the house of Joseph to come down to meet my lord the king.”21 At once A·bishʹai the son of Ze·ruʹiah said: “Should not Shimʹe·i be put to death for this, because he cursed the anointed of Jehovah?” 22 But David said: “What does this have to do with you, you sons of Ze·ruʹiah, that you should act against me today? Should anyone be put to death today in Israel? For do I not know that today I am king over Israel?” 23 Then the king said to Shimʹe·i: “You will not die.” And the king gave him his oath.24 Me·phibʹo·sheth, the grandson of Saul, also came down to meet the king. He had not cared for his feet or trimmed his mustache or washed his garments from the day the king left until the day he returned in peace. 25 When he came to Jerusalem to meet the king, the king said to him: “Why did you not go with me, Me·phibʹo·sheth?” 26 To this he said: “My lord the king, my servant tricked me. For your servant had said, ‘Let me get my donkey saddled so that I may ride on it and go with the king,’ for your servant is crippled. 27 But he slandered your servant to my lord the king. However, my lord the king is like an angel of the true God, so do whatever seems good to you. 28 All the household of my father could have been doomed to death by my lord the king, and yet you placed your servant among those eating at your table. So what right do I have to cry out further to the king?”29 However, the king said to him: “Why keep on speaking like this? I have decided that you and Ziʹba should share the field.” 30 At this Me·phibʹo·sheth said to the king: “Let him take it all, now that my lord the king has come to his house in peace.”31 Then Bar·zilʹlai the Gilʹe·ad·ite came down from Ro·geʹlim to the Jordan to escort the king to the Jordan. 32 Bar·zilʹlai was very old, 80 years of age, and he supplied the king with food while he was staying in Ma·ha·naʹim, for he was a very wealthy man. 33 So the king said to Bar·zilʹlai: “Cross over with me, and I will supply you with food in Jerusalem.” 34 But Bar·zilʹlai said to the king: “How many days of my life are left that I should go up with the king to Jerusalem? 35 I am 80 years old today. Can I discern between good and bad? Can I, your servant, taste what I eat and drink? Can I still listen to the voice of male and female singers? So why should your servant be an added burden to my lord the king? 36 It is enough that your servant could bring the king to the Jordan. Why should the king repay me with this reward? 37 Let your servant return, please, and let me die in my city near the burial place of my father and my mother. But here is your servant Chimʹham. Let him cross over with my lord the king, and you may do for him what seems good to you.”38 So the king said: “Chimʹham will go across with me, and I will do for him what seems good to you; whatever you ask of me I will do for you.” 39 All the people now began to cross the Jordan, and when the king crossed, the king kissed Bar·zilʹlai and blessed him; and Bar·zilʹlai returned home. 40 When the king went across to Gilʹgal, Chimʹham crossed with him. All the people of Judah and half the people of Israel brought the king across.41 Then all the men of Israel approached the king and said to him: “Why did our brothers the men of Judah steal you away and bring the king and his household over the Jordan, along with all of David’s men?” 42 All the men of Judah answered the men of Israel: “Because the king is related to us. Why are you angry over this? Have we eaten anything at the king’s expense, or has a gift been given to us?”43 However, the men of Israel answered the men of Judah: “We have ten parts in the king, so that we have a greater claim in David than you have. Why, then, have you treated us with contempt? Should we not have been first to bring our king back?” But the word of the men of Judah prevailed over that of the men of Israel.
2 Afterward David inquired of Jehovah, saying: “Should I go up into one of the cities of Judah?” Jehovah said to him: “Go up.” David then asked: “Where should I go?” He replied: “To Hebʹron.” 2 So David went up there with his two wives, A·hinʹo·am of Jezʹre·el and Abʹi·gail the widow of Naʹbal the Carʹmel·ite. 3 David also brought the men who were with him, each with his household, and they settled in the cities around Hebʹron. 4 Then the men of Judah came, and there they anointed David as king over the house of Judah.They told David: “The men of Jaʹbesh-gilʹe·ad were the ones who buried Saul.” 5 So David sent messengers to the men of Jaʹbesh-gilʹe·ad and said to them: “May you be blessed by Jehovah, because you showed loyal love to your lord Saul by burying him. 6 May Jehovah show loyal love and faithfulness to you. I will also show you kindness because you have done this. 7 Now let your hands be strong and be courageous men, for your lord Saul is dead, and the house of Judah has anointed me as king over them.”8 But Abʹner the son of Ner, the chief of Saul’s army, had taken Saul’s son Ish-boʹsheth and brought him across to Ma·ha·naʹim 9 and made him king over Gilʹe·ad, the Ashʹur·ites, Jezʹre·el, Eʹphra·im, Benjamin, and over all Israel. 10 Ish-boʹsheth, Saul’s son, was 40 years old when he became king over Israel, and he reigned for two years. The house of Judah, however, supported David. 11 The time that David was king in Hebʹron over the house of Judah was seven years and six months.12 In time Abʹner the son of Ner and the servants of Ish-boʹsheth, Saul’s son, went out from Ma·ha·naʹim to Gibʹe·on. 13 Joʹab the son of Ze·ruʹiah and the servants of David also went out and encountered them at the pool of Gibʹe·on; and one group sat on this side of the pool, and the other group on that side of the pool. 14 Finally Abʹner said to Joʹab: “Let the young men get up and engage in combat before us.” To this Joʹab said: “Let them get up.” 15 So they got up and crossed over by number, 12 for Benjamin and Saul’s son Ish-boʹsheth and 12 from the servants of David. 16 They grabbed one another by the head and each of them thrust his sword into the side of his opponent, and they all fell down together. So that place, which is in Gibʹe·on, was called Helʹkath-haz·zuʹrim.17 The fighting that ensued was extremely fierce that day, and Abʹner and the men of Israel were finally defeated before the servants of David. 18 Now the three sons of Ze·ruʹiah were there—Joʹab, A·bishʹai, and Asʹa·hel; and Asʹa·hel was as swift on his feet as a gazelle in the open field. 19 Asʹa·hel chased after Abʹner, and he would not veer to the right or to the left in his pursuit of Abʹner. 20 When Abʹner looked behind, he asked, “Is that you, Asʹa·hel?” to which he replied, “Yes, it is.” 21 Then Abʹner said to him: “Veer to your right or to your left and capture one of the young men, and take whatever you strip off him for yourself.” But Asʹa·hel did not want to stop chasing him. 22 So Abʹner said to Asʹa·hel once again: “Stop chasing me. Why should I strike you down? How could I look your brother Joʹab in the face?” 23 But he kept refusing to stop, so Abʹner struck him in the abdomen with the butt end of the spear, and the spear came out from his back; and he fell there and died on the spot. Everyone who came to the place where Asʹa·hel fell and died would stop and pause there.24 Then Joʹab and A·bishʹai went in pursuit of Abʹner. As the sun was setting, they came to the hill of Amʹmah, which faces Giʹah on the way to the wilderness of Gibʹe·on. 25 There the Benʹja·min·ites gathered together behind Abʹner, and they formed one company and made a stand on the top of a certain hill. 26 Then Abʹner called out to Joʹab: “Is the sword going to devour endlessly? Do you not know that the outcome will only be bitterness? How long, then, will it be before you tell the people to turn back from pursuing their brothers?” 27 At that Joʹab said: “As surely as the true God is living, if you had not spoken, then only by the morning would the people have stopped pursuing their brothers.” 28 Joʹab now blew the horn, and his men stopped chasing after Israel, and the fighting ceased.29 Abʹner and his men then marched through the Arʹa·bah all that night and crossed the Jordan and marched through the entire ravine and finally came to Ma·ha·naʹim. 30 After Joʹab turned back from pursuing Abʹner, he gathered all the people together. Of David’s servants, 19 were missing, in addition to Asʹa·hel. 31 But the servants of David had defeated the Benʹja·min·ites and the men of Abʹner, and 360 of their men had died. 32 They took Asʹa·hel and buried him in his father’s tomb, which is at Bethʹle·hem. Then Joʹab and his men marched all night long, and they reached Hebʹron at daybreak.
20 Now there was a troublemaker named Sheʹba the son of Bichʹri, a Benʹja·min·ite. He blew the horn and said: “We have no share in David, and we have no inheritance in the son of Jesʹse. Everyone to his gods, O Israel!” 2 At that all the men of Israel quit following David to follow Sheʹba the son of Bichʹri; but the men of Judah stuck to their king, from the Jordan to Jerusalem.3 When David came to his house at Jerusalem, the king took the ten concubines he had left behind to take care of the house, and he put them in a house under guard. He supplied food to them, but he did not have any relations with them. They remained in confinement until the day of their death, living as if they were widows, even though they had a living husband.4 The king now said to A·maʹsa: “Call the men of Judah together to me within three days, and you also should be here.” 5 So A·maʹsa went to call Judah together, but he came later than the set time that had been appointed for him. 6 Then David said to A·bishʹai: “Sheʹba the son of Bichʹri may do us more harm than Abʹsa·lom did. Take the servants of your lord and chase after him, so that he may not find fortified cities and escape from us.” 7 So the men of Joʹab, the Cherʹe·thites, the Pelʹe·thites, and all the mighty men went out after him; they left Jerusalem to chase after Sheʹba the son of Bichʹri. 8 When they were near the great stone in Gibʹe·on, A·maʹsa came to meet them. Now Joʹab was wearing his battle clothing, and he had a sword in its sheath strapped to his hip. When he stepped forward, the sword fell out.9 Joʹab said to A·maʹsa: “Are you all right, my brother?” Then with his right hand, Joʹab took hold of A·maʹsa’s beard as if to kiss him. 10 A·maʹsa was not on guard against the sword that was in Joʹab’s hand, and Joʹab stabbed him with it in the abdomen, and his intestines spilled out on the ground. He did not have to stab him again; once was enough to kill him. Then Joʹab and his brother A·bishʹai chased after Sheʹba the son of Bichʹri.11 One of Joʹab’s young men stood by him and was saying: “Whoever is on Joʹab’s side and whoever belongs to David, let him follow Joʹab!” 12 All the while A·maʹsa was wallowing in his blood in the middle of the road. When the man saw that all the people were stopping, he moved A·maʹsa from the road to the field. Then he threw a garment over him, because he saw that everyone was stopping when they came up to him. 13 After he had removed him from the road, all the men followed Joʹab to chase after Sheʹba the son of Bichʹri.14 Sheʹba passed through all the tribes of Israel to Abel of Beth-maʹa·cah. The Bichʹrites gathered together and also went in after him.15 Joʹab and his men came and besieged him in Abel of Beth-maʹa·cah and raised up a siege rampart against the city, as it was standing within a rampart. And all the men with Joʹab were undermining the wall to knock it down. 16 And a wise woman called out from the city: “Listen, men, listen! Please tell Joʹab, ‘Come here, and let me speak to you.’” 17 So he went near to her, and the woman said: “Are you Joʹab?” He replied: “I am.” At this she said to him: “Listen to the words of your servant.” He said: “I am listening.” 18 She continued: “They would always say in the past, ‘Let them inquire in Abel, and that was the end of the matter.’ 19 I represent the peaceable and faithful ones of Israel. You are seeking to destroy a city that is like a mother in Israel. Why should you do away with the inheritance of Jehovah?” 20 Joʹab answered: “It is unthinkable for me to do away with it and destroy it. 21 That is not the case at all. Rather, a man named Sheʹba the son of Bichʹri from the mountainous region of Eʹphra·im has rebelled against King David. If you hand over this one man, I will withdraw from the city.” Then the woman said to Joʹab: “Look! His head will be thrown over the wall to you!”22 At once the wise woman went in to all the people, and they cut off the head of Sheʹba the son of Bichʹri and threw it to Joʹab. At that he blew the horn, and they dispersed from the city, each one to his home; and Joʹab returned to Jerusalem to the king.23 Now Joʹab was in charge of all the army of Israel; Be·naiʹah the son of Je·hoiʹa·da was over the Cherʹe·thites and the Pelʹe·thites. 24 A·doʹram was over those conscripted for forced labor; Je·hoshʹa·phat the son of A·hiʹlud was the recorder. 25 Sheʹva was the secretary; Zaʹdok and A·biʹa·thar were priests. 26 And Iʹra the Jaʹir·ite also became a chief minister for David.
21 Now there was a famine in the days of David for three consecutive years, so David consulted Jehovah, and Jehovah said: “There is bloodguilt on Saul and on his house, because he put the Gibʹe·on·ites to death.” 2 So the king called the Gibʹe·on·ites and spoke to them. (Incidentally, the Gibʹe·on·ites were not Israelites but Amʹor·ites who remained, and the Israelites had sworn to spare them, but Saul sought to strike them down in his zeal for the people of Israel and Judah.) 3 David said to the Gibʹe·on·ites: “What should I do for you, and how can I make atonement, so that you will bless the inheritance of Jehovah?” 4 The Gibʹe·on·ites said to him: “It is not a matter of silver or gold for us in connection with Saul and his household; nor can we put any man to death in Israel.” At that he said: “Whatever you say, I will do for you.” 5 They said to the king: “The man who exterminated us and schemed to annihilate us from living anywhere in the territory of Israel— 6 let seven of his sons be given to us. We will hang their dead bodies before Jehovah in Gibʹe·ah of Saul, the chosen one of Jehovah.” The king then said: “I will hand them over.”7 However, the king showed compassion for Me·phibʹo·sheth, the son of Jonʹa·than the son of Saul, because of the oath made before Jehovah between David and Jonʹa·than, the son of Saul. 8 So the king took Ar·moʹni and Me·phibʹo·sheth, the two sons of Rizʹpah the daughter of Aʹiah whom she bore to Saul, and the five sons of Miʹchal the daughter of Saul whom she bore to Aʹdri·el the son of Bar·zilʹlai the Me·holʹath·ite. 9 Then he handed them over to the Gibʹe·on·ites, and they hung their dead bodies on the mountain before Jehovah. All seven of them died together; they were put to death in the first days of harvest, at the start of the barley harvest. 10 Then Rizʹpah the daughter of Aʹiah took sackcloth and spread it out on the rock from the start of harvest until rain poured down from the heavens on the bodies; she did not allow the birds of the heavens to land on them by day nor the wild beasts of the field to come near by night.11 David was told what Saul’s concubine Rizʹpah the daughter of Aʹiah had done. 12 So David went and took the bones of Saul and the bones of his son Jonʹa·than from the leaders of Jaʹbesh-gilʹe·ad, who had stolen them from the public square of Beth-shan, where the Phi·lisʹtines had hung them on the day that the Phi·lisʹtines struck down Saul on Gil·boʹa. 13 He brought the bones of Saul and the bones of his son Jonʹa·than up from there, and they also gathered the bones of the men who had been executed. 14 Then they buried the bones of Saul and of Jonʹa·than his son in the land of Benjamin in Zeʹla in the tomb of Kish his father. After they did everything that the king had commanded, God listened to their entreaties for the land.15 Once again there was war between the Phi·lisʹtines and Israel. So David and his servants went down and fought the Phi·lisʹtines, but David became exhausted. 16 A descendant of the Rephʹa·im named Ishʹbi-beʹnob, whose copper spear weighed 300 shekels and who was armed with a new sword, intended to strike David down. 17 At once A·bishʹai the son of Ze·ruʹiah came to his aid and struck the Phi·lisʹtine down and put him to death. At that time the men of David swore this oath to him: “You must not go out with us to battle anymore! You must not extinguish the lamp of Israel!”18 After this, war broke out again with the Phi·lisʹtines at Gob. At that time Sibʹbe·cai the Huʹshath·ite struck down Saph, who was a descendant of the Rephʹa·im.19 And war broke out again with the Phi·lisʹtines at Gob, and El·haʹnan the son of Jaʹa·re-orʹe·gim the Bethʹle·hem·ite struck down Go·liʹath the Gitʹtite, whose spear had a shaft like the beam of loom workers.20 War broke out yet again at Gath, where there was a man of extraordinary size, with 6 fingers on each hand and 6 toes on each foot, 24 in all; and he too was a descendant of the Rephʹa·im. 21 He kept taunting Israel. So Jonʹa·than the son of Shimʹe·i, David’s brother, struck him down.22 These four were descendants of the Rephʹa·im in Gath, and they fell by the hand of David and by the hand of his servants.
22 And David spoke to Jehovah the words of this song in the day that Jehovah rescued him out of the hand of all his enemies and out of Saul’s hand. 2 He said:“Jehovah is my crag and my stronghold and the One who rescues me. 3 My God is my rock, in whom I take refuge,My shield and my horn of salvation, my secure refugeAnd my place to flee, my savior; you who save me from violence. 4 I call on Jehovah, who is worthy of praise,And I will be saved from my enemies. 5 The waves of death broke all around me;Flash floods of worthless men terrified me. 6 The ropes of the Grave surrounded me;The snares of death confronted me. 7 In my distress I called on Jehovah,To my God I kept calling.Then from his temple he heard my voice,And my cry for help reached his ears. 8 Back and forth the earth began to shake and rock;The foundations of the heavens trembledAnd shook back and forth because he had been angered. 9 Smoke ascended from his nostrils,And a consuming fire came from his mouth;Glowing coals blazed from him.10 He made the heavens bend as he descended,And thick gloom was beneath his feet.11 He rode on a cherub and came flying.He was visible on the wings of a spirit.12 Then he put darkness around him as a shelter,In dark waters and thick clouds.13 From the brightness before him fiery coals blazed.14 Then Jehovah began to thunder from heaven;The Most High made his voice heard.15 He shot his arrows and scattered them;Lightning, and he threw them into confusion.16 The bed of the sea became visible;The foundations of the land were exposed by the rebuke of Jehovah,By the blast of the breath from his nostrils.17 He reached down from on high;He took hold of me and pulled me from deep waters.18 He rescued me from my strong enemy,From those hating me, who were stronger than I was.19 They confronted me on the day of my disaster,But Jehovah was my support.20 He brought me out into a place of safety;He rescued me because he was pleased with me.21 Jehovah rewards me according to my righteousness;He repays me according to the innocence of my hands.22 For I have kept the ways of Jehovah,And I have not wickedly abandoned my God.23 All his judgments are before me;I will not deviate from his statutes.24 I will remain blameless before him,And I will keep myself from error.25 May Jehovah repay me according to my righteousness,According to my innocence before him.26 With someone loyal you act in loyalty;With the blameless, mighty man, you deal blamelessly;27 With the pure you show yourself pure,But with the crooked you show yourself shrewd.28 For you save those who are humble,But your eyes are against the haughty, and you abase them.29 For you are my lamp, O Jehovah;It is Jehovah who lights up my darkness.30 With your help I can charge against a marauder band;By God’s power I can scale a wall.31 The way of the true God is perfect;The saying of Jehovah is refined.He is a shield to all those taking refuge in him.32 For who is a God besides Jehovah?And who is a rock except our God?33 The true God is my strong fortress,And he will make my way perfect.34 He makes my feet like those of a deer;He makes me stand on high places.35 He trains my hands for warfare;My arms can bend a bow of copper.36 You give me your shield of salvation,And your humility makes me great.37 You widen the path for my footsteps;My feet will not slip.38 I will pursue my enemies and annihilate them;I will not return until they are wiped out.39 And I will wipe them out and crush them, so that they will not rise up;They will fall under my feet.40 You will equip me with strength for the battle;You will make my foes collapse under me.41 You will make my enemies retreat from me;I will put an end to those who hate me.42 They cry for help, but there is no one to save them;They even cry to Jehovah, but he does not answer them.43 I will pound them as fine as the dust of the earth;I will pulverize and trample them like mud in the streets.44 You will rescue me from the faultfinding of my people.You will safeguard me to be the head of nations;A people whom I have not known will serve me.45 Foreigners will come cringing before me;What they hear about me will make them obey me.46 Foreigners will lose courage;They will come trembling from their strongholds.47 Jehovah is alive! Praised be my Rock!Let the God of the rock of my salvation be exalted.48 The true God executes vengeance for me;He subdues the peoples under me;49 He rescues me from my enemies.You lift me high above those who attack me;You save me from the man of violence.50 That is why I will thank you, O Jehovah, among the nations,And to your name I will sing praises:51 He performs great acts of salvation for his king;He displays loyal love to his anointed one,To David and his offspring forever.”
23 These are the last words of David:“The word of David the son of Jesʹse,And the word of the man who was raised on high,The anointed of the God of Jacob,The pleasant singer of the songs of Israel. 2 The spirit of Jehovah spoke through me;His word was on my tongue. 3 The God of Israel spoke;To me the Rock of Israel said:‘When the one ruling over mankind is righteous,Ruling in the fear of God, 4 It is like the morning light when the sun shines,A morning without clouds.It is like the brightness after the rain,Making grass sprout from the earth.’ 5 Is not my house like that before God?For he has made an eternal covenant with me,Arranged in every detail and secured.Because it means my complete salvation and all my delight,Is that not why he makes it flourish? 6 But worthless men are all thrown away like thornbushes,For they cannot be taken with the hand. 7 When a man touches them,He should be fully armed with iron and the shaft of a spear,And they should be completely burned up with fire in their place.”8 These are the names of David’s mighty warriors: Joʹsheb-bas·sheʹbeth a Tah·cheʹmo·nite, the head of the three. He brandished his spear over 800 slain at one time. 9 Next to him, El·e·aʹzar the son of Doʹdo the son of A·hoʹhi was among the three mighty warriors with David when they taunted the Phi·lisʹtines. They had gathered there for the battle, and when the men of Israel retreated, 10 he stood his ground and kept striking down the Phi·lisʹtines until his arm grew weary and his hand became stiff from gripping the sword. So Jehovah brought about a great victory on that day; and the people returned behind him to strip the slain.11 Next to him was Shamʹmah the son of Aʹgee the Harʹa·rite. The Phi·lisʹtines gathered together at Leʹhi, where there was a plot of land full of lentils; and the people fled because of the Phi·lisʹtines. 12 But he took his stand in the middle of the field and defended it and kept striking down the Phi·lisʹtines, so that Jehovah brought about a great victory.13 Three of the 30 headmen went down during the harvest to David at the cave of A·dulʹlam, and a company of the Phi·lisʹtines was camped in the Valley of Rephʹa·im. 14 David was then in the stronghold, and an outpost of the Phi·lisʹtines was in Bethʹle·hem. 15 Then David expressed his longing: “If only I could have a drink of the water from the cistern by the gate of Bethʹle·hem!” 16 At that the three mighty warriors forced their way into the camp of the Phi·lisʹtines and drew water from the cistern by the gate of Bethʹle·hem and brought it to David; but he refused to drink it and poured it out to Jehovah. 17 He said: “It is unthinkable on my part, O Jehovah, that I should do this! Should I drink the blood of the men going at the risk of their lives?” So he refused to drink it. These are the things that his three mighty warriors did.18 A·bishʹai the brother of Joʹab the son of Ze·ruʹiah was the head of another three; he brandished his spear over 300 slain, and he had a reputation like the three. 19 Although he was the most distinguished of the other three and he was their chief, he did not attain to the rank of the first three.20 Be·naiʹah the son of Je·hoiʹa·da was a courageous man who performed many exploits in Kabʹze·el. He struck down the two sons of Arʹi·el of Moʹab, and he descended into a waterpit on a snowy day and killed a lion. 21 He also struck down an Egyptian man of extraordinary size. Though the Egyptian had a spear in his hand, he went against him with a rod and snatched the spear away from the Egyptian’s hand and killed him with his own spear. 22 These things Be·naiʹah the son of Je·hoiʹa·da did, and he had a reputation like that of the three mighty warriors. 23 Although he was distinguished even more than the thirty, he did not attain to the rank of the three. However, David appointed him over his own bodyguard.24 Asʹa·hel the brother of Joʹab was among the thirty: El·haʹnan the son of Doʹdo of Bethʹle·hem, 25 Shamʹmah the Haʹrod·ite, E·liʹka the Haʹrod·ite, 26 Heʹlez the Palʹtite, Iʹra the son of Ikʹkesh the Te·koʹite, 27 Abi-eʹzer the Anʹa·thoth·ite, Me·bunʹnai the Huʹshath·ite, 28 Zalʹmon the A·hoʹhite, Maʹha·rai the Ne·tophʹa·thite, 29 Heʹleb the son of Baʹa·nah the Ne·tophʹa·thite, Itʹtai the son of Riʹbai of Gibʹe·ah of the Benʹja·min·ites, 30 Be·naiʹah a Pirʹa·thon·ite, Hidʹdai of the wadis of Gaʹash, 31 Aʹbi-alʹbon the Arʹbath·ite, Azʹma·veth the Bar-huʹmite, 32 E·liʹah·ba the Sha·alʹbo·nite, the sons of Jaʹshen, Jonʹa·than, 33 Shamʹmah the Harʹa·rite, A·hiʹam the son of Shaʹrar the Harʹa·rite, 34 E·liphʹe·let the son of A·hasʹbai the son of the Ma·acʹa·thite, E·liʹam the son of A·hithʹo·phel the Giʹlon·ite, 35 Hezʹro the Carʹmel·ite, Paʹa·rai the Arʹbite, 36 Iʹgal the son of Nathan of Zoʹbah, Baʹni the Gadʹite, 37 Zeʹlek the Amʹmon·ite, Naʹha·rai the Be·erʹoth·ite, the armor-bearer of Joʹab the son of Ze·ruʹiah, 38 Iʹra the Ithʹrite, Gaʹreb the Ithʹrite, 39 and U·riʹah the Hitʹtite—37 in all.
24 The anger of Jehovah again blazed against Israel when one incited David against them, saying: “Go, take a count of Israel and Judah.” 2 So the king said to Joʹab the chief of the army who was with him: “Please go through all the tribes of Israel, from Dan to Beʹer-sheʹba, and register the people, so that I may know the number of the people.” 3 But Joʹab said to the king: “May Jehovah your God multiply the people 100 times, and may the eyes of my lord the king see it, but why does my lord the king want to do such a thing?”4 But the king’s word prevailed over Joʹab and the chiefs of the army. So Joʹab and the chiefs of the army went out from before the king to register the people of Israel. 5 They crossed the Jordan and camped at A·roʹer, to the right of the city in the middle of the valley, toward the Gadʹites, and on to Jaʹzer. 6 After that they went on to Gilʹe·ad and the land of Tahʹtim-hodʹshi and continued to Dan-jaʹan and went around to Siʹdon. 7 Then they went to the fortress of Tyre and all the cities of the Hiʹvites and of the Caʹnaan·ites, and finally they ended up in the Negʹeb of Judah at Beʹer-sheʹba. 8 Thus they went through all the land and came to Jerusalem at the end of nine months and 20 days. 9 Joʹab now gave to the king the number of the people who were registered. Israel amounted to 800,000 warriors armed with swords, and the men of Judah were 500,000.10 But David’s heart was struck with remorse after he had numbered the people. David then said to Jehovah: “I have sinned greatly by doing this. And now, Jehovah, please forgive your servant’s error, for I have acted very foolishly.” 11 When David got up in the morning, Jehovah’s word came to Gad the prophet, David’s visionary, saying: 12 “Go and say to David, ‘This is what Jehovah says: “I am giving you three options. Choose the one that I should bring on you.”’” 13 So Gad came in to David and told him: “Should seven years of famine come on your land? Or should you flee for three months from your adversaries while they pursue you? Or should there be three days of pestilence in your land? Now consider carefully what I should reply to the One who sent me.” 14 So David said to Gad: “It is very distressing to me. Let us fall, please, into the hand of Jehovah, for his mercy is great; but do not let me fall into the hand of man.”15 Then Jehovah sent a pestilence on Israel from the morning until the designated time, so that 70,000 of the people from Dan to Beʹer-sheʹba died. 16 When the angel stretched out his hand toward Jerusalem to destroy it, Jehovah felt regret over the calamity, and he said to the angel bringing destruction among the people: “It is enough! Now let your hand drop.” Jehovah’s angel was close to the threshing floor of A·rauʹnah the Jebʹu·site.17 When David saw the angel who was striking the people down, he said to Jehovah: “I am the one who sinned, and I am the one who did wrong; but these sheep—what have they done? Let your hand, please, come against me and my father’s house.”18 So Gad came in to David on that day and said to him: “Go up, set up for Jehovah an altar on the threshing floor of A·rauʹnah the Jebʹu·site.” 19 So David went up at the word of Gad, as Jehovah had commanded. 20 When A·rauʹnah looked down and saw the king and his servants coming toward him, A·rauʹnah immediately went out and bowed down to the king with his face to the ground. 21 A·rauʹnah asked: “Why has my lord the king come to his servant?” David replied: “To buy from you the threshing floor in order to build an altar to Jehovah, so that the scourge against the people may be halted.” 22 But A·rauʹnah said to David: “Let my lord the king take it and offer up what seems good to him. Here are cattle for the burnt offering and the threshing sledge and the equipment of the cattle for the wood. 23 All of this, O king, A·rauʹnah gives to the king.” Then A·rauʹnah said to the king: “May Jehovah your God show you favor.”24 However, the king said to A·rauʹnah: “No, I must buy it from you for a price. I will not offer up to Jehovah my God burnt sacrifices that cost me nothing.” So David bought the threshing floor and the cattle for 50 silver shekels. 25 And David built an altar there to Jehovah and offered up burnt sacrifices and communion sacrifices. Jehovah then responded to the entreaty for the land, and the scourge against Israel was halted.
3 The war between the house of Saul and the house of David dragged on; and David kept getting stronger, and the house of Saul grew steadily weaker.2 Meanwhile, sons were born to David in Hebʹron. His firstborn was Amʹnon by A·hinʹo·am of Jezʹre·el. 3 His second was Chilʹe·ab by Abʹi·gail, the widow of Naʹbal the Carʹmel·ite; and the third was Abʹsa·lom the son of Maʹa·cah, the daughter of Talʹmai the king of Geshʹur. 4 The fourth was Ad·o·niʹjah the son of Hagʹgith, and the fifth was Sheph·a·tiʹah the son of A·biʹtal. 5 The sixth was Ithʹre·am by David’s wife Egʹlah. These were born to David in Hebʹron.6 While the war between the house of Saul and the house of David continued, Abʹner kept strengthening his position in the house of Saul. 7 Now Saul had had a concubine whose name was Rizʹpah, the daughter of Aʹiah. Ish-boʹsheth later said to Abʹner: “Why did you have relations with the concubine of my father?” 8 Abʹner grew very angry over the words of Ish-boʹsheth and said: “Am I a dog’s head from Judah? Until this very day, I have shown loyal love toward the house of your father Saul and to his brothers and his friends, and I have not betrayed you into the hand of David; yet today you call me to account for an error concerning a woman. 9 May God do so to Abʹner and add to it if I do not do for David just as Jehovah swore to him: 10 to transfer the kingdom from the house of Saul and to establish the throne of David over Israel and over Judah, from Dan to Beʹer-sheʹba.” 11 He was not able to say one more word in reply to Abʹner, for he was afraid of him.12 Abʹner immediately sent messengers to David, saying: “To whom does the land belong?” He added: “Make a covenant with me, and I will do whatever I can to turn all Israel to your side.” 13 To this he replied: “Good! I will make a covenant with you. The only thing I ask of you is that you do not try to see my face unless first you bring Miʹchal, Saul’s daughter, when you come to see me.” 14 Then David sent messengers to Ish-boʹsheth, Saul’s son, saying: “Give me my wife Miʹchal, to whom I became engaged for 100 foreskins of the Phi·lisʹtines.” 15 So Ish-boʹsheth sent to take her from her husband, Palʹti·el the son of Laʹish. 16 But her husband kept walking with her, weeping as he followed her as far as Ba·huʹrim. Then Abʹner said to him: “Go, return!” At that he returned.17 Meanwhile, Abʹner sent word to the elders of Israel, saying: “For some time you wanted to have David as king over you. 18 Now act, for Jehovah said to David: ‘By the hand of my servant David I will save my people Israel from the hand of the Phi·lisʹtines and from the hand of all their enemies.’” 19 Then Abʹner spoke to the people of Benjamin. Abʹner also went to speak privately to David at Hebʹron to tell him what Israel and the whole house of Benjamin had agreed upon.20 When Abʹner came to David at Hebʹron with 20 men, David held a feast for Abʹner and for the men with him. 21 Then Abʹner said to David: “Let me go and gather all Israel together to my lord the king, so that they may make a covenant with you, and you will become king over all that you desire.” So David sent Abʹner off, and he went his way in peace.22 Just then, David’s servants and Joʹab returned from a raid, bringing a great quantity of spoil back with them. Abʹner was no longer with David in Hebʹron, for he had sent him on his way in peace. 23 When Joʹab and all the army that was with him arrived, Joʹab was told: “Abʹner the son of Ner came to the king, and he sent him off, and he went his way in peace.” 24 So Joʹab went in to the king and said: “What have you done? Here Abʹner came to you. Why did you send him off so that he successfully got away? 25 You know Abʹner the son of Ner! He came here to fool you and to get to know your every move and to find out everything that you are doing.”26 So Joʹab left David and sent messengers after Abʹner, and they brought him back from the cistern of Siʹrah; but David did not know anything about it. 27 When Abʹner returned to Hebʹron, Joʹab took him aside inside the gate to speak with him privately. However, there he stabbed him in the abdomen, and he died; this was for killing his brother Asʹa·hel. 28 When David heard about it later, he said: “I and my kingdom are forever innocent before Jehovah of the bloodguilt for Abʹner the son of Ner. 29 May it turn back on the head of Joʹab and on the entire house of his father. May Joʹab’s house never be without a man suffering from a discharge or a leper or a man working at the spindle or one falling by the sword or one in need of food!” 30 So Joʹab and his brother A·bishʹai killed Abʹner because he had put Asʹa·hel their brother to death in the battle at Gibʹe·on.31 Then David said to Joʹab and all the people with him: “Rip your garments apart and tie on sackcloth and wail over Abʹner.” King David himself was walking behind the funeral bier. 32 They buried Abʹner in Hebʹron; and the king wept loudly at Abʹner’s tomb, and all the people gave way to weeping. 33 The king chanted over Abʹner and said:“Should Abʹner die the death of a senseless person?34 Your hands had not been bound,And your feet were not in fetters.You fell like one falling before criminals.”At that all the people wept over him again.35 Later all the people came to give David bread for consolation while it was still daytime, but David swore: “May God do so to me and add to it if before the sun sets I taste bread or anything at all!” 36 All the people took notice, and it pleased them. Like everything that the king did, it pleased all the people. 37 So all the people and all Israel knew on that day that the king was not responsible for having Abʹner the son of Ner put to death. 38 Then the king said to his servants: “Do you not know that a prince and a great man has fallen this day in Israel? 39 Today I am weak, although anointed as king, and these men, the sons of Ze·ruʹiah, are too brutal for me. May Jehovah repay the evildoer according to his own evil.”
4 When Saul’s son Ish-boʹsheth heard that Abʹner had died in Hebʹron, his courage failed him and all the Israelites were disturbed. 2 There were two men in charge of the marauder bands that belonged to the son of Saul: one was named Baʹa·nah and the other Reʹchab. They were sons of Rimʹmon the Be·erʹoth·ite, of the tribe of Benjamin. (For Be·erʹoth too used to be counted as part of Benjamin. 3 The Be·erʹoth·ites ran away to Gitʹta·im, and they are foreign residents there down to this day.)4 Now Saul’s son Jonʹa·than had a son whose feet were crippled. He was five years old when the report about Saul and Jonʹa·than came from Jezʹre·el, and his nurse picked him up and fled, but as she was fleeing in panic, he fell and was crippled. His name was Me·phibʹo·sheth.5 The sons of Rimʹmon the Be·erʹoth·ite, Reʹchab and Baʹa·nah, went to the house of Ish-boʹsheth during the hot part of the day, as he was taking his midday rest. 6 They went into the house as if they were getting wheat, and they struck him in the abdomen; then Reʹchab and his brother Baʹa·nah escaped. 7 When they had entered the house, he was lying on his bed in his bedroom, and they struck him and put him to death, after which they cut off his head. Then they took his head and walked all night long on the road to the Arʹa·bah. 8 And they brought the head of Ish-boʹsheth to David at Hebʹron and said to the king: “Here is the head of Ish-boʹsheth the son of Saul your enemy who sought your life. This day Jehovah gives to my lord the king revenge on Saul and his descendants.”9 However, David answered Reʹchab and his brother Baʹa·nah, the sons of Rimʹmon the Be·erʹoth·ite, and said to them: “As surely as Jehovah is living, the one who rescued me out of all distress, 10 when someone reported to me, ‘Here Saul is dead,’ and he thought he was bringing me good news, I took hold of him and killed him in Zikʹlag. That was the messenger’s reward he received from me! 11 How much more so when wicked men have killed a righteous man in his own house on his bed! Should I not require his blood from your hands and rid the earth of you?” 12 David then ordered the young men to kill them. They cut off their hands and feet and hung them by the pool in Hebʹron. But they took the head of Ish-boʹsheth and buried it in the burial place of Abʹner in Hebʹron.
5 In time all the tribes of Israel came to David at Hebʹron and said: “Look! We are your own bone and flesh. 2 In times past while Saul was our king, you were the one who was leading Israel on its campaigns. And Jehovah said to you: ‘You will shepherd my people Israel, and you will become leader over Israel.’” 3 So all the elders of Israel came to the king at Hebʹron, and King David made a covenant with them in Hebʹron before Jehovah. Then they anointed David as king over Israel.4 David was 30 years old when he became king, and he reigned for 40 years. 5 In Hebʹron he reigned over Judah for 7 years and 6 months, and in Jerusalem he reigned for 33 years over all Israel and Judah. 6 And the king and his men set out for Jerusalem against the Jebʹu·sites who were inhabiting the land. They taunted David: “You will never come in here! Even the blind and the lame will drive you away.” They thought, ‘David will never get in here.’ 7 However, David captured the stronghold of Zion, which is now the City of David. 8 So David said on that day: “Those who attack the Jebʹu·sites should go through the water tunnel to strike down both ‘the lame and the blind,’ who are hateful to David!” That is why it is said: “The blind and the lame will never enter the house.” 9 Then David took up residence in the stronghold, and it was called the City of David; and David began to build all around from the Mound inward. 10 Thus David became greater and greater, and Jehovah the God of armies was with him.11 King Hiʹram of Tyre sent messengers to David, also cedar timbers, woodworkers, and stonemasons for building walls, and they began to build a house for David. 12 And David knew that Jehovah had firmly established him as king over Israel and had exalted his kingdom for the sake of His people Israel.13 David took more concubines and wives in Jerusalem after he came from Hebʹron, and more sons and daughters were born to David. 14 These are the names of those born to him in Jerusalem: Sham·muʹa, Shoʹbab, Nathan, Solʹo·mon, 15 Ibʹhar, E·liʹshu·a, Neʹpheg, Ja·phiʹa, 16 E·lishʹa·ma, E·liʹa·da, and E·liphʹe·let.17 When the Phi·lisʹtines heard that David had been anointed as king over Israel, all the Phi·lisʹtines came up to search for David. When David heard about it, he went down to the stronghold. 18 Then the Phi·lisʹtines came in and spread out in the Valley of Rephʹa·im. 19 David inquired of Jehovah, saying: “Should I go up against the Phi·lisʹtines? Will you give them into my hand?” At this Jehovah said to David: “Go up, for I will surely give the Phi·lisʹtines into your hand.” 20 So David came to Baʹal-pe·raʹzim, and David struck them down there. At that he said: “Jehovah has broken through my enemies before me, like a breach made by waters.” That is why he named that place Baʹal-pe·raʹzim. 21 The Phi·lisʹtines abandoned their idols there, and David and his men took them away.22 Later the Phi·lisʹtines came up once again and spread out in the Valley of Rephʹa·im. 23 David inquired of Jehovah, but He said: “Do not go directly up. Instead, go around behind them, and come against them in front of the baʹca bushes. 24 And when you hear the sound of marching in the tops of the baʹca bushes, then act decisively, for Jehovah will have gone out before you to strike down the army of the Phi·lisʹtines.” 25 So David did just as Jehovah commanded him, and he struck down the Phi·lisʹtines from Geʹba all the way to Geʹzer.
6 David again gathered all the best troops in Israel, 30,000 men. 2 Then David and all the men with him set out for Baʹal·e-juʹdah to bring up from there the Ark of the true God, before which people call on the name of Jehovah of armies, who sits enthroned above the cherubs. 3 However, they placed the Ark of the true God on a new wagon to transport it from the house of A·binʹa·dab, which was on the hill; and Uzʹzah and A·hiʹo, the sons of A·binʹa·dab, were leading the new wagon.4 So they transported the Ark of the true God from A·binʹa·dab’s house on the hill, and A·hiʹo was walking ahead of the Ark. 5 David and all the house of Israel were celebrating before Jehovah with all sorts of juniper-wood instruments, harps, other stringed instruments, tambourines, sistrums, and cymbals. 6 But when they came to the threshing floor of Naʹcon, Uzʹzah thrust his hand out to the Ark of the true God and grabbed hold of it, for the cattle nearly upset it. 7 At that Jehovah’s anger blazed against Uzʹzah, and the true God struck him down there for his irreverent act, and he died there beside the Ark of the true God. 8 But David became angry because Jehovah’s wrath had broken through against Uzʹzah; and that place has been called Peʹrez-uzʹzah down to this day. 9 So David became fearful of Jehovah on that day and said: “How can the Ark of Jehovah come to me?” 10 David was not willing to bring the Ark of Jehovah to where he was in the City of David. Instead, David had it taken to the house of Oʹbed-eʹdom the Gitʹtite.11 The Ark of Jehovah remained at the house of Oʹbed-eʹdom the Gitʹtite for three months, and Jehovah kept blessing Oʹbed-eʹdom and all his household. 12 The report was made to King David: “Jehovah has blessed the house of Oʹbed-eʹdom and all that belongs to him because of the Ark of the true God.” So David went to bring the Ark of the true God from the house of Oʹbed-eʹdom up to the City of David with rejoicing. 13 When the carriers of the Ark of Jehovah had marched six steps, he sacrificed a bull and a fattened animal.14 David was dancing around before Jehovah with all his might; all the while David wore a linen ephʹod. 15 David and all the house of Israel were bringing up the Ark of Jehovah with joyful shouting and with the sound of the horn. 16 But when the Ark of Jehovah came into the City of David, Saul’s daughter Miʹchal looked down through the window and saw King David leaping and dancing around before Jehovah; and she began to despise him in her heart. 17 So they brought the Ark of Jehovah in and set it in its place inside the tent that David had pitched for it. Then David offered up burnt offerings and communion sacrifices before Jehovah. 18 When David finished offering up the burnt offerings and the communion sacrifices, he blessed the people in the name of Jehovah of armies. 19 Further, he distributed to all the people, to the whole multitude of Israel, to each man and woman, a ring-shaped loaf of bread, a date cake, and a raisin cake, and then all the people left, each to his own house.20 When David returned to bless his own household, Saul’s daughter Miʹchal came out to meet him. She said: “How glorious the king of Israel made himself when he uncovered himself today before the eyes of the slave girls of his servants, just as an empty-headed man openly uncovers himself!” 21 At this David said to Miʹchal: “My celebration was before Jehovah, who chose me rather than your father and all his household and who appointed me as leader over Jehovah’s people, Israel. Therefore, I will celebrate before Jehovah, 22 and I will humble myself even more than this and become low even in my own eyes. But by the slave girls whom you mentioned, I will be glorified.” 23 So Saul’s daughter Miʹchal had no children down to the day of her death.
7 When the king was settled in his own house and Jehovah had given him rest from all his surrounding enemies, 2 the king said to Nathan the prophet: “Here I am living in a house of cedars while the Ark of the true God sits in the midst of tent cloths.” 3 Nathan replied to the king: “Go and do whatever is in your heart, for Jehovah is with you.”4 On that very night, the word of Jehovah came to Nathan, saying: 5 “Go and say to my servant David, ‘This is what Jehovah says: “Should you build me a house to dwell in? 6 For I have not dwelled in a house from the day I brought the people of Israel out of Egypt to this day, but I have been moving about in a tent and in a tabernacle. 7 During all the time that I went with all the Israelites, did I ever say one word to any of the tribal leaders of Israel whom I appointed to shepherd my people Israel, saying, ‘Why did you not build a house of cedars for me?’”’ 8 Now say this to my servant David, ‘This is what Jehovah of armies says: “I took you from the pastures, from following the flock, to become a leader over my people Israel. 9 And I will be with you wherever you go, and I will do away with all your enemies from before you; and I will make a great name for you like the name of the great men of the earth. 10 I will appoint a place for my people Israel and settle them, and they will live there and not be disturbed anymore; and wicked men will not oppress them again as they did in the past, 11 from the day that I appointed judges over my people Israel. And I will give you rest from all your enemies.“‘“Also, Jehovah has told you that Jehovah will make a house for you. 12 When your days come to an end and you are laid to rest with your forefathers, then I will raise up your offspring after you, your own son, and I will firmly establish his kingdom. 13 He is the one who will build a house for my name, and I will firmly establish the throne of his kingdom forever. 14 I will become his father, and he will become my son. When he does wrong, I will reprove him with the rod of men and with the strokes of the sons of men. 15 My loyal love will not be taken away from him the way I took it away from Saul, whom I removed from before you. 16 Your house and your kingdom will be secure forever before you; your throne will be firmly established forever.”’”17 Nathan told David all these words and this entire vision.18 At that King David came in and sat down before Jehovah and said: “Who am I, O Sovereign Lord Jehovah? And what is my house that you have brought me this far? 19 As if this were not enough, O Sovereign Lord Jehovah, you also speak about the house of your servant down to a distant future time; and this is instruction for all mankind, O Sovereign Lord Jehovah. 20 What more can your servant David say to you when you know me so well, O Sovereign Lord Jehovah? 21 For the sake of your word and in agreement with your heart you have done all these great things and have revealed them to your servant. 22 That is why you are truly great, O Sovereign Lord Jehovah. There is no one like you, and there is no God except you; everything we have heard with our ears confirms this. 23 And what other nation on earth is like your people Israel? God went and redeemed them as his people, making a name for himself by doing great and awe-inspiring things for them. You drove out the nations and their gods in behalf of your people, whom you redeemed to yourself from Egypt. 24 You established your people Israel as your own people for all time; and you, O Jehovah, have become their God.25 “Now, O Jehovah God, carry out the promise you have made concerning your servant and his house for all time, and may you do just as you have promised. 26 May your name be exalted forever, so that people may say, ‘Jehovah of armies is God over Israel,’ and may the house of your servant David be firmly established before you. 27 For you, Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, have made a revelation to your servant by saying, ‘I will build a house for you.’ That is why your servant has the courage to pray this prayer to you. 28 And now, O Sovereign Lord Jehovah, you are the true God, and your words are truth, and you have promised these good things to your servant. 29 So may it please you to bless the house of your servant, and may it continue forever before you; for you, O Sovereign Lord Jehovah, have promised, and with your blessing may the house of your servant be blessed forever.”
8 Some time later, David defeated the Phi·lisʹtines and subdued them, and David took Methʹeg-amʹmah out of the hands of the Phi·lisʹtines.2 He defeated the Moʹab·ites and made them lie down on the ground and measured them with a line. He measured out two lines to be put to death, and one full line to be kept alive. And the Moʹab·ites became David’s servants and brought tribute.3 David defeated Had·ad·eʹzer the son of Reʹhob the king of Zoʹbah as he was on his way to restore his authority at the Eu·phraʹtes River. 4 David captured 1,700 horsemen and 20,000 foot soldiers from him. Then David hamstrung all but 100 of the chariot horses.5 When the Syrians of Damascus came to help King Had·ad·eʹzer of Zoʹbah, David struck down 22,000 of the Syrians. 6 David then established garrisons in Syria of Damascus, and the Syrians became David’s servants and brought tribute. Jehovah gave David victory wherever he went. 7 Moreover, David took the circular shields of gold from the servants of Had·ad·eʹzer and brought them to Jerusalem. 8 From Beʹtah and Be·roʹthai, cities of Had·ad·eʹzer, King David took a great quantity of copper.9 Now King Toʹi of Haʹmath heard that David had defeated the entire army of Had·ad·eʹzer. 10 So Toʹi sent his son Joʹram to King David to ask about his welfare and to congratulate him because he had fought and defeated Had·ad·eʹzer (for Had·ad·eʹzer had often fought against Toʹi), and he brought articles of silver, gold, and copper. 11 King David sanctified these to Jehovah, along with the silver and the gold that he had sanctified from all the nations that he had subdued: 12 from Syria and Moʹab, from the Amʹmon·ites, the Phi·lisʹtines, the A·malʹek·ites, and from the spoil of Had·ad·eʹzer the son of Reʹhob the king of Zoʹbah. 13 David also made a name for himself when he came back from striking down 18,000 Eʹdom·ites in the Valley of Salt. 14 He established garrisons in Eʹdom. In all Eʹdom he established garrisons, and all the Eʹdom·ites became David’s servants. Jehovah gave David victory wherever he went.15 David kept reigning over all Israel, and David was administering justice and righteousness for all his people. 16 Joʹab the son of Ze·ruʹiah was over the army, and Je·hoshʹa·phat the son of A·hiʹlud was recorder. 17 Zaʹdok the son of A·hiʹtub and A·himʹe·lech the son of A·biʹa·thar were priests, and Se·raiʹah was secretary. 18 Be·naiʹah the son of Je·hoiʹa·da was over the Cherʹe·thites and the Pelʹe·thites. And David’s sons became chief ministers.
9 David then said: “Is there anyone still left of the house of Saul to whom I may show loyal love for the sake of Jonʹa·than?” 2 Now there was a servant of the house of Saul named Ziʹba. So they called him to David, and the king asked him: “Are you Ziʹba?” He replied: “I am your servant.” 3 The king continued: “Is there anyone left of the house of Saul to whom I may extend God’s loyal love?” Ziʹba replied to the king: “There is still one son of Jonʹa·than; he is crippled in both feet.” 4 The king asked him: “Where is he?” Ziʹba replied to the king: “He is in the house of Maʹchir the son of Amʹmi·el at Lo-deʹbar.”5 King David immediately sent for him and took him from the house of Maʹchir the son of Amʹmi·el at Lo-deʹbar. 6 When Me·phibʹo·sheth the son of Jonʹa·than the son of Saul came in to David, he at once fell facedown and prostrated himself. Then David said: “Me·phibʹo·sheth!” to which he replied: “Here is your servant.” 7 David said to him: “Do not be afraid, for I will certainly show loyal love to you for the sake of your father Jonʹa·than, and I will return to you all the land of Saul your grandfather, and you will always dine at my table.”8 At that he prostrated himself and said: “What is your servant, that you have turned your attention to a dead dog like me?” 9 The king now sent for Ziʹba, Saul’s attendant, and said to him: “Everything that belonged to Saul and to all his house I give to the grandson of your master. 10 You will cultivate the land for him—you and your sons and your servants—and you will gather its produce to provide food for those who belong to the grandson of your master to eat. But Me·phibʹo·sheth, the grandson of your master, will always dine at my table.”Now Ziʹba had 15 sons and 20 servants. 11 Then Ziʹba said to the king: “Your servant will do all that my lord the king commands his servant to do.” So Me·phibʹo·sheth ate at David’s table like one of the sons of the king. 12 Now Me·phibʹo·sheth also had a young son named Miʹca; and all those who lived in Ziʹba’s house became servants of Me·phibʹo·sheth. 13 And Me·phibʹo·sheth lived in Jerusalem, for he always ate at the table of the king; and he was crippled in both feet.
1 After Saul’s death, when David had returned from defeating the A·malʹek·ites, David stayed at Zikʹlag for two days. 2 On the third day, a man came from the camp of Saul with his garments ripped apart and dirt on his head. When he approached David, he fell down to the ground and prostrated himself.3 David asked him: “Where are you coming from?” He replied: “I have escaped from the camp of Israel.” 4 David asked him: “How did things turn out? Please tell me.” To this he said: “The people have fled from the battle and many have fallen and died. Even Saul and his son Jonʹa·than have died.” 5 Then David asked the young man who brought him the news: “How do you know that Saul and his son Jonʹa·than are dead?” 6 The young man replied: “By chance I was on Mount Gil·boʹa, and there was Saul supporting himself on his spear, and the chariots and horsemen had caught up with him. 7 When he turned around and saw me, he called me, and I said, ‘Here I am!’ 8 He asked me, ‘Who are you?’ I replied, ‘I am an A·malʹek·ite.’ 9 Then he said, ‘Please stand over me and put me to death, for I am in great agony, but I am still alive.’ 10 So I stood over him and put him to death, for I knew that he could not survive after he had fallen down wounded. Then I took the crown that was on his head and the bracelet that was on his arm, and I brought them here to my lord.”11 At this David took hold of his garments and ripped them apart, and so did all the men who were with him. 12 And they wailed and wept and fasted until evening for Saul, for his son Jonʹa·than, for the people of Jehovah, and for the house of Israel, because they had fallen by the sword.13 David asked the young man who brought him the news: “Where are you from?” He said: “I am the son of a foreign resident, an A·malʹek·ite.” 14 Then David said to him: “Why did you not fear to lift your hand to do away with the anointed of Jehovah?” 15 With that David called one of the young men and said: “Step forward and strike him.” So he struck him down, and he died. 16 David said to him: “Your blood is on your own head, because your own mouth testified against you by saying, ‘I myself put the anointed of Jehovah to death.’”17 Then David chanted this dirge over Saul and his son Jonʹa·than 18 and said that the people of Judah should be taught the dirge called “The Bow,” which is written in the book of Jaʹshar:19 “The beauty, O Israel, lies slain upon your high places.How the mighty have fallen!20 Do not tell it in Gath;Do not announce it in the streets of Ashʹke·lon,Or the daughters of the Phi·lisʹtines will rejoice,Or the daughters of the uncircumcised men will exult.21 You mountains of Gil·boʹa,May there be no dew or rain upon you,Nor fields producing holy contributions,Because there the shield of mighty ones was defiled,The shield of Saul is no longer anointed with oil.22 From the blood of the slain, from the fat of mighty ones,The bow of Jonʹa·than did not turn back,And the sword of Saul would not return without success.23 Saul and Jonʹa·than, beloved and cherished during their life,And in death they were not separated.Swifter than the eagles they were,Mightier than the lions.24 O daughters of Israel, weep over Saul,Who clothed you in scarlet and finery,Who put gold ornaments upon your clothing.25 How the mighty have fallen in battle!Jonʹa·than lies slain upon your high places!26 I am distressed over you, my brother Jonʹa·than;You were very dear to me.More wonderful was your love to me than the love of women.27 How the mighty have fallenAnd the weapons of war have perished!”
10 Now the queen of Sheʹba heard the report about Solʹo·mon in connection with the name of Jehovah, so she came to test him with perplexing questions. 2 She arrived in Jerusalem with a very impressive entourage, with camels carrying balsam oil and great quantities of gold and precious stones. She went in to Solʹo·mon and spoke to him about everything that was close to her heart. 3 Solʹo·mon then answered all her questions. There was nothing too difficult for the king to explain to her.4 When the queen of Sheʹba had seen all the wisdom of Solʹo·mon, the house that he built, 5 the food of his table, the seating of his servants, the table service of his waiters and their attire, his cupbearers, and his burnt sacrifices that he regularly offered up at the house of Jehovah, she was left completely breathless. 6 So she said to the king: “The report that I heard in my own land about your achievements and about your wisdom was true. 7 But I did not put faith in the reports until I had come and had seen it with my own eyes. And look! I had not been told the half. You have far surpassed in wisdom and prosperity the report that I heard. 8 Happy are your men, and happy are your servants who stand before you constantly, listening to your wisdom! 9 May Jehovah your God be praised, who has taken pleasure in you by putting you on the throne of Israel. Because of Jehovah’s everlasting love for Israel, he appointed you as king to administer justice and righteousness.”10 Then she gave the king 120 talents of gold and a great amount of balsam oil and precious stones. Never again was such a quantity of balsam oil brought in as what the queen of Sheʹba gave to King Solʹo·mon.11 Hiʹram’s fleet of ships that carried gold from Oʹphir also brought from Oʹphir algum timbers in very great quantity, and precious stones. 12 The king made from the algum timbers supports for the house of Jehovah and for the king’s house, as well as harps and stringed instruments for the singers. Such algum timbers have never again been brought in or seen down to this day.13 King Solʹo·mon also gave the queen of Sheʹba whatever she desired and asked for, in addition to what he gave her out of his own generosity. After that she left and returned to her own land, together with her servants.14 And the weight of the gold that came to Solʹo·mon in one year amounted to 666 talents of gold, 15 besides that from the merchants and the profit from the traders and from all the kings of the Arabs and the governors of the land.16 King Solʹo·mon made 200 large shields of alloyed gold (600 shekels of gold went on each shield) 17 and 300 bucklers of alloyed gold (three miʹnas of gold went on each buckler). Then the king put them in the House of the Forest of Lebʹa·non.18 The king also made a great ivory throne and overlaid it with refined gold. 19 There were six steps to the throne, and the throne had a round canopy behind it, and there were armrests on both sides of the seat, and two lions were standing beside the armrests. 20 And there were 12 lions standing on the six steps, one at each end of the six steps. No other kingdom had made anything like it.21 All the drinking vessels of King Solʹo·mon were of gold, and all the utensils of the House of the Forest of Lebʹa·non were of pure gold. There was nothing made of silver, for silver was considered as nothing in the days of Solʹo·mon. 22 For the king had a fleet of ships of Tarʹshish on the sea along with Hiʹram’s fleet. Once every three years, the fleet of ships of Tarʹshish would come loaded with gold and silver, ivory, apes, and peacocks.23 So King Solʹo·mon was greater than all the other kings of the earth in riches and wisdom. 24 And people of all the earth sought an audience with Solʹo·mon to hear his wisdom that God had put in his heart. 25 They would each bring a gift—articles of silver, articles of gold, garments, armor, balsam oil, horses, and mules—and this continued year after year.26 And Solʹo·mon kept accumulating chariots and horses; he had 1,400 chariots and 12,000 horses, and he kept them stationed in the chariot cities and close by the king in Jerusalem.27 The king made the silver in Jerusalem as plentiful as the stones, and cedarwood as plentiful as the sycamore trees in the She·pheʹlah.28 The horses of Solʹo·mon had been imported from Egypt, and the company of the king’s merchants would obtain the horses in droves for one price. 29 Each chariot imported from Egypt cost 600 silver pieces, and a horse cost 150; in turn, they would export them to all the kings of the Hitʹtites and the kings of Syria.
11 But King Solʹo·mon loved many foreign women besides the daughter of Pharʹaoh: Moʹab·ite, Amʹmon·ite, Eʹdom·ite, Si·doʹni·an, and Hitʹtite women. 2 They were from the nations about whom Jehovah had said to the Israelites: “You must not go in among them, and they should not come in among you, for they will surely incline your heart to follow their gods.” But Solʹo·mon clung to them and loved them. 3 And he had 700 wives who were princesses and 300 concubines, and his wives gradually inclined his heart. 4 In Solʹo·mon’s old age, his wives inclined his heart to follow other gods, and his heart was not complete with Jehovah his God like the heart of David his father. 5 And Solʹo·mon followed after Ashʹto·reth, the goddess of the Si·doʹni·ans, and Milʹcom, the disgusting god of the Amʹmon·ites. 6 And Solʹo·mon did what was bad in the eyes of Jehovah, and he did not follow Jehovah completely as David his father had done.7 It was then that Solʹo·mon built a high place to Cheʹmosh, the disgusting god of Moʹab, on the mountain in front of Jerusalem and to Moʹlech, the disgusting god of the Amʹmon·ites. 8 That was what he did for all his foreign wives who were making sacrificial smoke and sacrificing to their gods.9 Jehovah became furious at Solʹo·mon, because his heart had inclined away from Jehovah the God of Israel, who had appeared to him twice 10 and had warned him about this very thing, that he should not go after other gods. But he did not obey what Jehovah had commanded. 11 Jehovah now said to Solʹo·mon: “Because you have done this and you have not kept my covenant and my statutes as I commanded you, I will surely rip the kingdom away from you, and I will give it to one of your servants. 12 However, for the sake of your father David, I will not do it in your lifetime. I will rip it out of the hand of your son, 13 but I will not rip away the entire kingdom. One tribe I will give to your son, for the sake of David my servant and for the sake of Jerusalem, which I have chosen.”14 Jehovah then raised up a resister against Solʹo·mon, Haʹdad the Eʹdom·ite, of the royal family of Eʹdom. 15 When David defeated Eʹdom, Joʹab the chief of the army went up to bury the slain, and he tried to strike down every male in Eʹdom. 16 (For Joʹab and all Israel stayed there for six months until he had done away with every male in Eʹdom.) 17 But Haʹdad fled with some of his father’s Eʹdom·ite servants, and they went to Egypt; Haʹdad was then a young boy. 18 So they set out from Midʹi·an and came to Paʹran. They took men with them from Paʹran and came to Egypt, to Pharʹaoh king of Egypt, who gave him a house, assigned him a food allowance, and gave him land. 19 Haʹdad found favor in the eyes of Pharʹaoh, so much so that he gave him in marriage the sister of his own wife, Tahʹpe·nes the queen. 20 In time the sister of Tahʹpe·nes bore him a son, Ge·nuʹbath, and Tahʹpe·nes brought him up in the house of Pharʹaoh, and Ge·nuʹbath remained in the house of Pharʹaoh among the sons of Pharʹaoh.21 Haʹdad heard in Egypt that David had been laid to rest with his forefathers and that Joʹab the chief of the army had died. So Haʹdad said to Pharʹaoh: “Send me away, so that I may go to my own land.” 22 But Pharʹaoh said to him: “What have you lacked with me that you now seek to go to your own land?” To this he said: “Nothing, but please send me away.”23 God also raised up against Solʹo·mon another resister, Reʹzon the son of E·liʹa·da, who had fled from his lord, Had·ad·eʹzer the king of Zoʹbah. 24 He gathered men to himself and became chief of a marauder band when David defeated them. So they went to Damascus and settled there and began reigning in Damascus. 25 And he became a resister of Israel all the days of Solʹo·mon, adding to the harm done by Haʹdad, and he abhorred Israel while he reigned over Syria.26 And there was Jer·o·boʹam the son of Neʹbat, an Eʹphra·im·ite from Zerʹe·dah, a servant of Solʹo·mon’s whose mother’s name was Ze·ruʹah, a widow. He too began to rebel against the king. 27 This is why he rebelled against the king: Solʹo·mon had built the Mound and had closed up the gap of the City of David his father. 28 Now this Jer·o·boʹam was a capable man. When Solʹo·mon saw that the young man was a hard worker, he made him overseer over all the compulsory service of the house of Joseph. 29 During that time Jer·o·boʹam went out from Jerusalem, and the prophet A·hiʹjah the Shiʹlo·nite found him on the road. A·hiʹjah was wearing a new garment, and the two of them were by themselves in the field. 30 A·hiʹjah took hold of the new garment he was wearing and ripped it into 12 pieces. 31 Then he said to Jer·o·boʹam:“Take ten pieces for yourself, for this is what Jehovah the God of Israel says: ‘Here I am ripping the kingdom out of the hand of Solʹo·mon, and I will give you ten tribes. 32 But one tribe will remain his for the sake of my servant David and for the sake of Jerusalem, the city I have chosen out of all the tribes of Israel. 33 I will do this because they have left me and are bowing down to Ashʹto·reth the goddess of the Si·doʹni·ans, to Cheʹmosh the god of Moʹab, and to Milʹcom the god of the Amʹmon·ites, and they have not walked in my ways by doing what is right in my eyes and observing my statutes and my judgments as his father David did. 34 But I will not take the entire kingdom out of his hand, and I will keep him as a chieftain for all the days of his life, for the sake of David my servant whom I chose, because he obeyed my commandments and my statutes. 35 But I will take the kingship out of the hand of his son and give it to you, that is, ten tribes. 36 To his son I will give one tribe, so that David my servant may always have a lamp before me in Jerusalem, the city that I have chosen for myself as the place to put my name. 37 I will take you, and you will reign over all that you desire, and you will become king over Israel. 38 And if you obey all that I command you and walk in my ways and do what is right in my eyes by obeying my statutes and my commandments, just as David my servant did, I will also be with you. I will build you a lasting house, just as I have built for David, and I will give you Israel. 39 And I will humiliate the offspring of David because of this, but not always.’”40 So Solʹo·mon tried to put Jer·o·boʹam to death, but Jer·o·boʹam fled to Egypt, to Shiʹshak the king of Egypt, and he remained in Egypt until Solʹo·mon’s death.41 As for the rest of the history of Solʹo·mon, all that he did and his wisdom, is it not written in the book of the history of Solʹo·mon? 42 The length of Solʹo·mon’s reign in Jerusalem over all Israel was 40 years. 43 Then Solʹo·mon was laid to rest with his forefathers and was buried in the City of David his father; and his son Re·ho·boʹam became king in his place.
12 Re·ho·boʹam went to Sheʹchem, for all Israel had come to Sheʹchem to make him king. 2 As soon as Jer·o·boʹam the son of Neʹbat heard of it (he was still in Egypt because he had run off on account of King Solʹo·mon and was living in Egypt), 3 they sent for him. After that Jer·o·boʹam and all the congregation of Israel came to Re·ho·boʹam and said: 4 “Your father made our yoke harsh. But if you make the harsh service of your father easier and you lighten the heavy yoke he put on us, we will serve you.”5 At this he said to them: “Go away for three days; then return to me.” So the people went away. 6 King Re·ho·boʹam then consulted with the older men who had served his father Solʹo·mon while he was alive, saying: “What advice would you give on how to reply to this people?” 7 They answered him: “If today you would become a servant to this people and submit to their request and give them a favorable answer, they will always be your servants.”8 However, he rejected the advice that the older men gave him, and he consulted with the young men who had grown up with him and who were now his attendants. 9 He asked them: “What advice do you offer on how we should reply to this people who have said to me, ‘Make the yoke your father put on us lighter’?” 10 The young men who had grown up with him said to him: “This is what you should say to this people who have said to you, ‘Your father made our yoke heavy, but you should make it lighter for us’; this is what you should tell them, ‘My little finger will be thicker than my father’s hips. 11 My father imposed a heavy yoke on you, but I will add to your yoke. My father punished you with whips, but I will punish you with scourges.’”12 Jer·o·boʹam and all the people came to Re·ho·boʹam on the third day, just as the king had said: “Return to me on the third day.” 13 But the king answered the people harshly, rejecting the advice that the older men had given him. 14 He spoke to them according to the advice of the young men, saying: “My father made your yoke heavy, but I will add to your yoke. My father punished you with whips, but I will punish you with scourges.” 15 So the king did not listen to the people, for this turn of events was caused by Jehovah, in order to carry out the word that Jehovah had spoken through A·hiʹjah the Shiʹlo·nite to Jer·o·boʹam the son of Neʹbat.16 When all Israel saw that the king refused to listen to them, the people replied to the king: “What share do we have in David? We have no inheritance in the son of Jesʹse. To your gods, O Israel. Now look after your own house, O David!” With that Israel returned to their homes. 17 But Re·ho·boʹam continued to reign over the Israelites living in the cities of Judah.18 Then King Re·ho·boʹam sent A·doʹram, who was in charge of those conscripted for forced labor, but all Israel stoned him to death. King Re·ho·boʹam managed to mount his chariot to flee to Jerusalem. 19 And the Israelites have been in revolt against the house of David down to this day.20 As soon as all Israel heard that Jer·o·boʹam had returned, they summoned him to the assembly and made him king over all Israel. None of the people followed the house of David except the tribe of Judah.21 When Re·ho·boʹam arrived in Jerusalem, he immediately congregated all the house of Judah and the tribe of Benjamin, 180,000 trained warriors, to fight against the house of Israel in order to restore the kingship to Re·ho·boʹam the son of Solʹo·mon. 22 Then the word of the true God came to She·maiʹah the man of the true God, saying: 23 “Say to Re·ho·boʹam the son of Solʹo·mon the king of Judah and to all the house of Judah and Benjamin and the rest of the people, 24 ‘This is what Jehovah says: “You must not go up and fight against your Israelite brothers. Each one of you must return to his house, for I have caused this to happen.”’” So they obeyed the word of Jehovah and went back home, as Jehovah had told them.25 Jer·o·boʹam then built up Sheʹchem in the mountainous region of Eʹphra·im and lived there. From there he went out and built up Pe·nuʹel. 26 Jer·o·boʹam said in his heart: “Now the kingdom will return to the house of David. 27 If this people continues to go up to offer sacrifices at the house of Jehovah in Jerusalem, the heart of this people will also return to their lord, King Re·ho·boʹam of Judah. Yes, they will kill me and return to King Re·ho·boʹam of Judah.” 28 After consultation, the king made two golden calves and said to the people: “It is too much for you to go up to Jerusalem. Here is your God, O Israel, who brought you up out of the land of Egypt.” 29 Then he placed one in Bethʹel, and the other he put in Dan. 30 And this caused them to sin, and the people went as far as Dan to worship the one there.31 And he made houses of worship on the high places and appointed priests from the people in general, those who were not Levites. 32 Jer·o·boʹam also established a festival in the eighth month, on the 15th day of the month, like the festival in Judah. On the altar that he made at Bethʹel, he sacrificed to the calves he had made, and at Bethʹel he assigned priests for the high places that he had made. 33 And he began to make offerings on the altar that he had made at Bethʹel on the 15th day in the eighth month, in the month that he had devised on his own; and he established a festival for the people of Israel, and he ascended the altar to make offerings and sacrificial smoke.
13 By the word of Jehovah, a man of God came from Judah to Bethʹel while Jer·o·boʹam was standing by the altar to make sacrificial smoke. 2 Then he called out against the altar by the word of Jehovah and said: “O altar, altar! This is what Jehovah says: ‘Look! A son named Jo·siʹah will be born to the house of David! He will sacrifice on you the priests of the high places, those making sacrificial smoke on you, and he will burn human bones on you.’” 3 He gave a sign on that day, saying: “This is the sign that Jehovah has declared: Look! The altar will be ripped apart, and the ashes that are on it will be spilled out.”4 As soon as the king heard the word that the man of the true God had called out against the altar at Bethʹel, Jer·o·boʹam stretched out his hand from the altar and said: “Seize him!” Immediately, the hand that he had stretched out against him dried up, and he could not draw it back. 5 Then the altar was ripped apart and the ashes were spilled out from the altar according to the sign that the man of the true God had given by the word of Jehovah.6 The king now said to the man of the true God: “Please, beg for the favor of Jehovah your God, and pray in my behalf that my hand may be restored to me.” At this the man of the true God begged for the favor of Jehovah, and the king’s hand was restored to its former condition. 7 The king then said to the man of the true God: “Come home with me and take some food, and let me give you a gift.” 8 But the man of the true God said to the king: “Even if you gave me half your house, I would not come with you and eat bread or drink water in this place. 9 For this is what I was commanded by the word of Jehovah: ‘You must not eat bread or drink water, and you must not return by the way you came.’” 10 So he left by another way, and he did not return by the way he had come to Bethʹel.11 There was a certain old prophet dwelling in Bethʹel, and his sons came home and related to him all the things that the man of the true God had done that day in Bethʹel and the words he had spoken to the king. After they related this to their father, 12 their father asked them: “Which way did he go?” So his sons showed him the way that the man of the true God from Judah had gone. 13 He now said to his sons: “Saddle the donkey for me.” They saddled the donkey for him, and he mounted it.14 He followed the man of the true God and found him sitting under a big tree. Then he said to him: “Are you the man of the true God who came from Judah?” He replied: “I am.” 15 He said to him: “Come home with me and eat bread.” 16 But he said: “I cannot go back with you or accept your invitation, nor may I eat bread or drink water with you in this place. 17 For I was told by the word of Jehovah, ‘You must not eat bread or drink water there. You must not return by the way you came.’” 18 At this he said to him: “I too am a prophet like you, and an angel told me by the word of Jehovah, ‘Have him come back with you to your house so that he may eat bread and drink water.’” (He deceived him.) 19 So he went back with him to eat bread and drink water in his house.20 While they were sitting at the table, the word of Jehovah came to the prophet who had brought him back, 21 and he called out to the man of the true God from Judah, saying, “This is what Jehovah says: ‘Because you rebelled against the order of Jehovah and did not keep the commandment that Jehovah your God gave you, 22 but you went back to eat bread and drink water in the place about which you were told, “Do not eat bread or drink water,” your dead body will not come into the tomb of your forefathers.’”23 After the man of the true God ate bread and drank, the old prophet saddled the donkey for the prophet whom he had brought back. 24 Then he got on his way, but a lion came across him on the road and killed him. His dead body was thrown onto the road, and the donkey stood beside it; the lion was also standing beside the dead body. 25 There were men passing by who saw the dead body thrown onto the road and the lion standing beside the dead body. They came in and told about it in the city where the old prophet lived.26 When the prophet who had brought him back from the road heard of it, he immediately said: “It is the man of the true God who rebelled against the order of Jehovah; so Jehovah gave him over to the lion, to maul and to kill him, according to the word of Jehovah that he spoke to him.” 27 He then said to his sons: “Saddle the donkey for me.” So they saddled it. 28 Then he went on his way and found the dead body thrown onto the road, with the donkey and the lion standing beside it. The lion had not eaten the dead body, nor had it mauled the donkey. 29 The prophet lifted up the dead body of the man of the true God and put him on the donkey, and he brought him back into his own city to mourn and bury him. 30 So he laid the dead body in his own tomb, and they kept crying out over him: “Too bad, my brother!” 31 After burying him, he told his sons: “When I die, you must bury me in the place where the man of the true God is buried. Lay my bones next to his bones. 32 The word that he called out by the word of Jehovah against the altar in Bethʹel and against all the houses of worship on the high places in the cities of Sa·marʹi·a is sure to take place.”33 Even after this happened, Jer·o·boʹam did not turn back from his bad way, but he kept appointing priests for the high places from the people in general. He would install as priests anyone who so desired, saying: “Let him become one of the priests for the high places.” 34 This sin on the part of the household of Jer·o·boʹam led to their destruction and annihilation from the face of the earth.
14 At that time A·biʹjah the son of Jer·o·boʹam fell sick. 2 So Jer·o·boʹam said to his wife: “Rise up, please, and disguise yourself so that they will not know that you are Jer·o·boʹam’s wife, and go to Shiʹloh. Look! A·hiʹjah the prophet is there. He is the one who spoke of me becoming king over this people. 3 Take with you ten loaves of bread, sprinkled cakes, and a flask of honey, and go to him. He will then tell you what is going to happen to the boy.”4 Jer·o·boʹam’s wife did what he said. She rose up and went to Shiʹloh and came to the house of A·hiʹjah. A·hiʹjah’s eyes stared straight ahead, and he could not see because of his age.5 But Jehovah had told A·hiʹjah: “Here is the wife of Jer·o·boʹam coming to inquire of you regarding her son, for he is sick. I will tell you what to say to her. When she arrives, she will conceal her identity.”6 As soon as A·hiʹjah heard the sound of her footsteps as she was coming into the entrance, he said: “Come in, wife of Jer·o·boʹam. Why are you concealing your identity? I have been assigned to give you a harsh message. 7 Go, tell Jer·o·boʹam, ‘This is what Jehovah the God of Israel says: “I raised you up from among your people to make you a leader over my people Israel. 8 Then I ripped the kingdom away from the house of David and gave it to you. But you have not become like my servant David, who kept my commandments and who walked after me with all his heart, doing only what was right in my eyes. 9 But you have done worse than all those who were prior to you, and you made for yourself another god and metal images to offend me, and it is I whom you have turned your back on. 10 For that reason I am bringing calamity on the house of Jer·o·boʹam, and I will annihilate from Jer·o·boʹam every male, including the helpless and weak in Israel, and I will make a clean sweep of the house of Jer·o·boʹam, just as one clears away the dung until it is all gone! 11 Anyone belonging to Jer·o·boʹam who dies in the city, the dogs will eat; and anyone who dies in the field, the birds of the heavens will eat, for Jehovah has spoken it.”’12 “Now rise up; go to your house. When you set foot in the city, the child will die. 13 All Israel will mourn him and bury him, for he alone of Jer·o·boʹam’s family will be laid in a grave, because he is the only one of the house of Jer·o·boʹam in whom Jehovah the God of Israel has found something good. 14 Jehovah will raise up for himself a king over Israel who will do away with the house of Jer·o·boʹam from that day forward, yes, even now. 15 Jehovah will strike Israel down like a reed that sways in the water, and he will uproot Israel off this good land that he gave to their forefathers, and he will scatter them beyond the River, because they made their sacred poles, offending Jehovah. 16 And he will abandon Israel because of the sins that Jer·o·boʹam has committed and has caused Israel to commit.”17 At that Jer·o·boʹam’s wife rose up and went on her way and came to Tirʹzah. As she came to the threshold of the house, the boy died. 18 So they buried him, and all Israel mourned him, according to Jehovah’s word that he had spoken through his servant A·hiʹjah the prophet.19 And the rest of the history of Jer·o·boʹam, how he waged war and how he reigned, is written in the book of the history of the times of the kings of Israel. 20 And the length of Jer·o·boʹam’s reign was 22 years, after which he was laid to rest with his forefathers; and his son Naʹdab became king in his place.21 Meanwhile, Re·ho·boʹam the son of Solʹo·mon had become king in Judah. Re·ho·boʹam was 41 years old when he became king, and he reigned for 17 years in Jerusalem, the city that Jehovah had chosen out of all the tribes of Israel as the place to put his name. The name of Re·ho·boʹam’s mother was Naʹa·mah the Amʹmon·it·ess. 22 And Judah was doing what was bad in the eyes of Jehovah, and by the sins they committed they provoked him more than their forefathers had done. 23 They too kept building for themselves high places, sacred pillars, and sacred poles on every high hill and under every luxuriant tree. 24 There were also male temple prostitutes in the land. They acted according to all the detestable things of the nations that Jehovah had driven out before the Israelites.25 In the fifth year of King Re·ho·boʹam, King Shiʹshak of Egypt came up against Jerusalem. 26 He took the treasures of the house of Jehovah and the treasures of the king’s house. He took everything, including all the gold shields that Solʹo·mon had made. 27 So King Re·ho·boʹam made copper shields to replace them, and he entrusted them to the chiefs of the guard, who guarded the entrance of the king’s house. 28 Whenever the king came to the house of Jehovah, the guards would carry them, and then they would return them to the guard chamber.29 And the rest of the history of Re·ho·boʹam, all that he did, is it not written in the book of the history of the times of the kings of Judah? 30 There was constant warfare between Re·ho·boʹam and Jer·o·boʹam. 31 Then Re·ho·boʹam was laid to rest with his forefathers and was buried with his forefathers in the City of David. His mother’s name was Naʹa·mah the Amʹmon·it·ess. And his son A·biʹjam became king in his place.
15 In the 18th year of King Jer·o·boʹam the son of Neʹbat, A·biʹjam became king over Judah. 2 He reigned for three years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Maʹa·cah the granddaughter of A·bishʹa·lom. 3 He went on walking in all the sins that his father committed prior to him, and his heart was not complete with Jehovah his God like the heart of David his forefather. 4 However, on account of David, Jehovah his God gave him a lamp in Jerusalem by raising up his son after him and keeping Jerusalem in existence. 5 For David did what was right in the eyes of Jehovah, and he did not turn aside from anything that He had commanded him all the days of his life, except in the matter of U·riʹah the Hitʹtite. 6 And there was warfare between Re·ho·boʹam and Jer·o·boʹam all the days of his life.7 As for the rest of the history of A·biʹjam, all that he did, is it not written in the book of the history of the times of the kings of Judah? There was also war between A·biʹjam and Jer·o·boʹam. 8 Then A·biʹjam was laid to rest with his forefathers, and they buried him in the City of David; and his son Aʹsa became king in his place.9 In the 20th year of King Jer·o·boʹam of Israel, Aʹsa began to reign over Judah. 10 He reigned in Jerusalem for 41 years. His grandmother’s name was Maʹa·cah the granddaughter of A·bishʹa·lom. 11 Aʹsa did what was right in the eyes of Jehovah, like David his forefather. 12 He expelled the male temple prostitutes from the land and removed all the disgusting idols that his forefathers had made. 13 He even removed Maʹa·cah his grandmother from her position as queen mother, because she had made an obscene idol for the worship of the sacred pole. Aʹsa cut down her obscene idol and burned it in the Kidʹron Valley. 14 But the high places were not removed. Nevertheless, Aʹsa’s heart was complete with Jehovah all his life. 15 And he brought the things that he and his father had made holy into the house of Jehovah—silver, gold, and various utensils.16 There was constant warfare between Aʹsa and Baʹa·sha the king of Israel. 17 So King Baʹa·sha of Israel came up against Judah and began to build up Raʹmah to prevent anyone from going out or coming in to King Aʹsa of Judah. 18 At that Aʹsa took all the silver and the gold that were left in the treasuries of the house of Jehovah and the treasuries of the house of the king and handed them over to his servants. King Aʹsa then sent them to Ben-haʹdad the son of Tab·rimʹmon the son of Heʹzi·on, the king of Syria, who was dwelling in Damascus, saying: 19 “There is a treaty between me and you and between my father and your father. I am sending you a gift of silver and gold. Come, break your treaty with King Baʹa·sha of Israel, so that he will withdraw from me.” 20 Ben-haʹdad listened to King Aʹsa and sent the chiefs of his armies against the cities of Israel, and they struck down Iʹjon, Dan, Aʹbel-beth-maʹa·cah, all Chinʹne·reth, and all the land of Naphʹta·li. 21 When Baʹa·sha heard of it, he immediately quit building Raʹmah and continued dwelling in Tirʹzah. 22 King Aʹsa then summoned all Judah—no one was exempt—and they carried off the stones and timbers of Raʹmah that Baʹa·sha had been building with, and with them King Aʹsa built up Geʹba in Benjamin, and Mizʹpah.23 As for all the rest of the history of Aʹsa, all his mightiness and all that he did and the cities that he built, is it not written in the book of the history of the times of the kings of Judah? But in his old age he suffered from a disease in his feet. 24 Then Aʹsa was laid to rest with his forefathers and was buried with them in the City of David his forefather; and his son Je·hoshʹa·phat became king in his place.25 Naʹdab the son of Jer·o·boʹam became king over Israel in the second year of King Aʹsa of Judah, and he reigned over Israel for two years. 26 He kept doing what was bad in the eyes of Jehovah and walked in the way of his father and in his sin that he caused Israel to commit. 27 Baʹa·sha the son of A·hiʹjah of the house of Isʹsa·char conspired against him, and Baʹa·sha struck him down at Gibʹbe·thon, which belonged to the Phi·lisʹtines, while Naʹdab and all Israel were besieging Gibʹbe·thon. 28 So Baʹa·sha put him to death in the third year of King Aʹsa of Judah and became king in his place. 29 And as soon as he became king, he struck down all the house of Jer·o·boʹam. He did not let remain anyone breathing who belonged to Jer·o·boʹam; he had them annihilated according to Jehovah’s word that he had spoken through his servant A·hiʹjah the Shiʹlo·nite. 30 This was because of the sins that Jer·o·boʹam had committed and had caused Israel to commit and because he had greatly offended Jehovah the God of Israel. 31 As for the rest of the history of Naʹdab, all that he did, is it not written in the book of the history of the times of the kings of Israel? 32 And there was constant warfare between Aʹsa and King Baʹa·sha of Israel.33 In the third year of King Aʹsa of Judah, Baʹa·sha the son of A·hiʹjah became king in Tirʹzah over all Israel and reigned for 24 years. 34 But he kept doing what was bad in the eyes of Jehovah, and he walked in the way of Jer·o·boʹam and in his sin that he caused Israel to commit.
16 The word of Jehovah against Baʹa·sha then came to Jeʹhu the son of Ha·naʹni, saying: 2 “I raised you up out of the dust and made you leader over my people Israel, but you kept walking in the way of Jer·o·boʹam and caused my people Israel to sin so that they offended me with their sins. 3 So I am making a clean sweep of Baʹa·sha and his house, and I will make his house like the house of Jer·o·boʹam the son of Neʹbat. 4 Anyone belonging to Baʹa·sha who dies in the city the dogs will eat; and anyone belonging to him who dies in the field the birds of the heavens will eat.”5 As for the rest of the history of Baʹa·sha, what he did and his mightiness, is it not written in the book of the history of the times of the kings of Israel? 6 Then Baʹa·sha was laid to rest with his forefathers and was buried in Tirʹzah; and Eʹlah his son became king in his place. 7 Also through the prophet Jeʹhu the son of Ha·naʹni, Jehovah’s word came against Baʹa·sha and his house, both because of all the badness that he committed in the eyes of Jehovah by offending him with the work of his hands, becoming like the house of Jer·o·boʹam, and also because of his striking him down.8 In the 26th year of King Aʹsa of Judah, Eʹlah the son of Baʹa·sha became king over Israel in Tirʹzah, and he reigned for two years. 9 His servant Zimʹri, the chief of half of his chariot forces, conspired against him while he was in Tirʹzah drinking himself drunk at the house of Arʹza, who was over the household in Tirʹzah. 10 Zimʹri came in and struck him down and put him to death in the 27th year of King Aʹsa of Judah, and he became king in his place. 11 When he became king, as soon as he sat down on his throne, he struck down all the house of Baʹa·sha. He did not spare a single male, whether of his relatives or of his friends. 12 Thus Zimʹri annihilated the whole house of Baʹa·sha, according to the word that Jehovah had spoken against Baʹa·sha through Jeʹhu the prophet. 13 This was for all the sins that Baʹa·sha and his son Eʹlah had committed and the sins they had caused Israel to commit by offending Jehovah the God of Israel with their worthless idols. 14 As for the rest of the history of Eʹlah, all that he did, is it not written in the book of the history of the times of the kings of Israel?15 In the 27th year of King Aʹsa of Judah, Zimʹri became king for seven days in Tirʹzah while the troops were camped against Gibʹbe·thon, which belonged to the Phi·lisʹtines. 16 In time the troops who were encamped heard it being said: “Zimʹri has conspired and has also struck down the king.” So all Israel made Omʹri, the chief of the army, king over Israel on that day in the camp. 17 Omʹri and all Israel with him went up from Gibʹbe·thon and laid siege to Tirʹzah. 18 When Zimʹri saw that the city had been captured, he went into the fortified tower of the king’s house and burned the house down over himself, and he died. 19 This was for his own sins that he had committed by doing what was bad in the eyes of Jehovah by walking in the way of Jer·o·boʹam and for the sin he had caused Israel to commit. 20 As for the rest of the history of Zimʹri and his conspiracy, is it not written in the book of the history of the times of the kings of Israel?21 It was then that the people of Israel were divided into two factions. One part of the people became followers of Tibʹni the son of Giʹnath, wanting to make him king, and the other part followed Omʹri. 22 But the people who were following Omʹri prevailed over the people following Tibʹni the son of Giʹnath. So Tibʹni died, and Omʹri became king.23 In the 31st year of King Aʹsa of Judah, Omʹri became king over Israel, and he reigned for 12 years. In Tirʹzah he reigned for six years. 24 He bought the mountain of Sa·marʹi·a from Sheʹmer for two talents of silver, and he built a city on the mountain. He named the city that he built Sa·marʹi·a, after Sheʹmer the owner of the mountain. 25 Omʹri kept doing what was bad in the eyes of Jehovah, and he was worse than all who were prior to him. 26 He walked in all the ways of Jer·o·boʹam the son of Neʹbat and in the sin he had caused Israel to commit by offending Jehovah the God of Israel with their worthless idols. 27 As for the rest of the history of Omʹri, what he did and his mighty exploits, is it not written in the book of the history of the times of the kings of Israel? 28 Then Omʹri was laid to rest with his forefathers and was buried in Sa·marʹi·a; and his son Aʹhab became king in his place.29 Aʹhab the son of Omʹri became king over Israel in the 38th year of King Aʹsa of Judah, and Aʹhab the son of Omʹri reigned over Israel in Sa·marʹi·a for 22 years. 30 Aʹhab the son of Omʹri was worse in the eyes of Jehovah than all those who were prior to him. 31 As if it were a trivial thing for him to walk in the sins of Jer·o·boʹam the son of Neʹbat, he also took as wife Jezʹe·bel the daughter of Eth·baʹal, the king of the Si·doʹni·ans, and began to serve Baʹal and to bow down to him. 32 Further, he set up an altar to Baʹal at the house of Baʹal that he built in Sa·marʹi·a. 33 Aʹhab also made the sacred pole. Aʹhab did more to offend Jehovah the God of Israel than all the kings of Israel prior to him.34 In his days, Hiʹel the Bethʹel·ite rebuilt Jerʹi·cho. At the cost of A·biʹram his firstborn he laid its foundation, and at the cost of Seʹgub his youngest he put up its doors, according to the word of Jehovah spoken through Joshua the son of Nun.
17 Now E·liʹjah the Tishʹbite, an inhabitant of Gilʹe·ad, said to Aʹhab: “As surely as Jehovah the God of Israel whom I serve is living, during these years there will be no dew or rain except by my word!”2 The word of Jehovah came to him, saying: 3 “Leave here, and turn eastward and hide at the Valley of Cheʹrith, east of the Jordan. 4 You should drink from the stream, and I will command the ravens to supply you food there.” 5 He immediately went and did according to the word of Jehovah; he went and stayed by the Valley of Cheʹrith, east of the Jordan. 6 And the ravens were bringing him bread and meat in the morning and bread and meat in the evening, and he drank from the stream. 7 But after some days, the stream ran dry, because there was no rain in the land.8 The word of Jehovah then came to him: 9 “Rise up, go to Zarʹe·phath, which belongs to Siʹdon, and stay there. Look! I will command a widow there to supply you with food.” 10 So he rose up and went to Zarʹe·phath. When he came to the entrance of the city, there was a widow gathering pieces of wood. So he called to her and said: “Please, bring me a little water in a cup so that I may drink.” 11 As she went to get it, he called to her: “Please, bring me a piece of bread in your hand.” 12 At this she said: “As surely as Jehovah your God is living, I have no bread, only a handful of flour in the large jar and a little oil in the small jar. Now I am gathering a few pieces of wood, and I will go in and make something for me and my son. After we have eaten, we will die.”13 Then E·liʹjah said to her: “Do not be afraid. Go in and do as you said. But first make me a small round loaf of bread with what is there, and bring it out to me. Then you can make something afterward for you and your son. 14 For this is what Jehovah the God of Israel says: ‘The large jar of flour will not run out, and the small jar of oil will not run dry until the day Jehovah makes it rain on the surface of the ground.’” 15 So she went and did as E·liʹjah said, and she together with him and her household ate for many days. 16 The large jar of flour did not run out, and the small jar of oil did not run dry, according to Jehovah’s word that he had spoken through E·liʹjah.17 After these things, the son of the woman who owned the house fell sick, and his sickness became so severe that he stopped breathing. 18 At this she said to E·liʹjah: “What do you have against me, O man of the true God? Have you come to remind me of my guilt and to put my son to death?” 19 But he said to her: “Give me your son.” Then he took him from her arms and carried him up to the roof chamber, where he was staying, and he laid him on his own bed. 20 He called out to Jehovah: “O Jehovah my God, are you also bringing harm to the widow with whom I am staying by putting her son to death?” 21 Then he stretched himself out over the child three times and called out to Jehovah: “O Jehovah my God, please, let this child’s life come back into him.” 22 Jehovah listened to E·liʹjah’s request, and the life of the child came back into him, and he revived. 23 E·liʹjah took the child and brought him down from the roof chamber into the house and gave him to his mother; and E·liʹjah said: “See, your son is alive.” 24 At that the woman said to E·liʹjah: “Now I know that you truly are a man of God and that Jehovah’s word in your mouth is truth.”
18 After some time, in the third year, Jehovah’s word came to E·liʹjah, saying: “Go, present yourself to Aʹhab, and I will send rain on the surface of the ground.” 2 So E·liʹjah went to present himself to Aʹhab, while the famine was severe in Sa·marʹi·a.3 Meanwhile, Aʹhab called O·ba·diʹah, who was over the household. (Now O·ba·diʹah greatly feared Jehovah, 4 and when Jezʹe·bel was doing away with Jehovah’s prophets, O·ba·diʹah took 100 prophets and hid them 50 to a cave, and he supplied them with bread and water.) 5 Aʹhab then said to O·ba·diʹah: “Go through the land to all the springs of water and to all the valleys. Perhaps we can find enough grass to keep the horses and mules alive and not have all our animals die.” 6 So they divided between themselves the land they were going to pass through. Aʹhab went alone by one way, and O·ba·diʹah went alone by another way.7 As O·ba·diʹah was on his way, E·liʹjah was there to meet him. At once he recognized him and fell facedown and said: “Is this you, my lord E·liʹjah?” 8 He replied to him: “It is I. Go and tell your lord: ‘E·liʹjah is here.’” 9 But he said: “What sin have I committed that you should hand your servant over to Aʹhab to put me to death? 10 As surely as Jehovah your God is living, there is not a nation or a kingdom where my lord has not sent to look for you. After they said, ‘He is not here,’ he made the kingdom and the nation swear that they could not find you. 11 Now you are saying, ‘Go and tell your lord: “E·liʹjah is here.”’ 12 When I depart from you, the spirit of Jehovah will carry you away to a place I will not know, and when I tell Aʹhab and he does not find you, he will surely kill me. Yet, your servant has feared Jehovah from his youth. 13 Has my lord not been told what I did when Jezʹe·bel was killing the prophets of Jehovah, how I hid 100 of the prophets of Jehovah by groups of 50 in a cave and kept supplying them bread and water? 14 But now you are saying, ‘Go and tell your lord: “E·liʹjah is here.”’ He will certainly kill me.” 15 However, E·liʹjah said: “As surely as Jehovah of armies whom I serve is living, today I will present myself to him.”16 So O·ba·diʹah went off to meet Aʹhab and told him, and Aʹhab went to meet E·liʹjah.17 As soon as Aʹhab saw E·liʹjah, he said to him: “Is this you, the one bringing great trouble on Israel?”18 To this he said: “I have not brought trouble on Israel, but you and the house of your father have, by abandoning the commandments of Jehovah and by following the Baʹals. 19 And now summon all Israel to me at Mount Carʹmel, as well as the 450 prophets of Baʹal and the 400 prophets of the sacred pole, who are eating at the table of Jezʹe·bel.” 20 So Aʹhab sent word among all the people of Israel and collected the prophets together at Mount Carʹmel.21 Then E·liʹjah approached all the people and said: “How long will you be limping between two different opinions? If Jehovah is the true God, follow him; but if Baʹal is, follow him!” But the people did not say a word in answer to him. 22 E·liʹjah then said to the people: “I am the only prophet of Jehovah left, while the prophets of Baʹal are 450 men. 23 Let them give us two young bulls, and let them choose one young bull and cut it into pieces and put it on the wood, but they should not put fire to it. I will prepare the other young bull, and I will place it on the wood, but I will not put fire to it. 24 Then you must call on the name of your god, and I will call on the name of Jehovah. The God who answers by fire will show that he is the true God.” To this all the people answered: “What you say is good.”25 E·liʹjah now said to the prophets of Baʹal: “Choose one young bull and prepare it first, because you are the majority. Then call on the name of your god, but you must not put fire to it.” 26 So they took the young bull that was given to them, prepared it, and kept calling on the name of Baʹal from morning until noon, saying: “O Baʹal, answer us!” But there was no voice and no one answering. They kept limping around the altar that they had made. 27 About noon E·liʹjah began to mock them and say: “Call out at the top of your voice! After all, he is a god! Perhaps he is deep in thought or he has gone to relieve himself. Or maybe he is asleep and someone needs to wake him up!” 28 They were calling out at the top of their voice and cutting themselves with daggers and lances, according to their custom, until their blood gushed out all over them. 29 Noon was past and they continued in a frenzy until the time the evening grain offering is presented, but there was no voice and no one answering; no one was paying attention.30 At length E·liʹjah said to all the people: “Approach me.” So all the people approached him. Then he repaired the altar of Jehovah that had been torn down. 31 E·liʹjah then took 12 stones, corresponding to the number of the tribes of the sons of Jacob, to whom Jehovah’s word had come, saying: “Israel will be your name.” 32 With the stones he built an altar in the name of Jehovah. Then he made a trench all around the altar, an area large enough to sow with two seah measures of seed. 33 After that he put the pieces of wood in order, cut the young bull into pieces, and placed it on the wood. He now said: “Fill four large jars with water and pour it on the burnt offering and on the pieces of wood.” 34 Then he said: “Do it again.” So they did it again. Once more he said: “Do it a third time.” So they did it a third time. 35 And the water ran all around the altar, and he also filled the trench with water.36 About the time when the evening grain offering is presented, E·liʹjah the prophet stepped forward and said: “O Jehovah, the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, today let it be known that you are God in Israel and that I am your servant and that it is by your word that I have done all these things. 37 Answer me, O Jehovah! Answer me so that this people may know that you, Jehovah, are the true God and that you are turning their hearts back to you.”38 At that the fire of Jehovah fell from above and consumed the burnt offering, the pieces of wood, the stones, and the dust, and it licked up the water from the trench. 39 When all the people saw it, they immediately fell facedown and said: “Jehovah is the true God! Jehovah is the true God!” 40 Then E·liʹjah said to them: “Seize the prophets of Baʹal! Do not let a single one of them escape!” At once they seized them, and E·liʹjah brought them down to the stream of Kiʹshon and slaughtered them there.41 E·liʹjah now said to Aʹhab: “Go up, eat and drink, for there is the sound of a heavy downpour.” 42 So Aʹhab went up to eat and drink, while E·liʹjah went up to the top of Carʹmel and crouched on the ground, keeping his face between his knees. 43 Then he said to his attendant: “Go up, please, and look toward the sea.” So he went up and looked and said: “There is nothing at all.” Seven times E·liʹjah said, “Go back.” 44 The seventh time his attendant said: “Look! There is a small cloud like a man’s hand ascending out of the sea.” He now said: “Go, say to Aʹhab, ‘Hitch up the chariot! Go down so that the downpour may not detain you!’” 45 Meanwhile, the sky grew dark with clouds, the wind blew, and a heavy downpour fell; and Aʹhab kept riding and made his way to Jezʹre·el. 46 But the hand of Jehovah came on E·liʹjah, and he wrapped his garment around his hips and ran ahead of Aʹhab all the way to Jezʹre·el.
19 Then Aʹhab told Jezʹe·bel all that E·liʹjah had done and how he had killed all the prophets with the sword. 2 At that Jezʹe·bel sent a messenger to E·liʹjah, saying: “So may the gods do to me and add to it if by this time tomorrow I do not make you like each one of them!” 3 At that he became afraid, so he got up and ran for his life. He came to Beʹer-sheʹba, which belongs to Judah, and he left his attendant there. 4 He went a day’s journey into the wilderness and came and sat down under a broom tree, and he asked that he might die. He said: “It is enough! Now, O Jehovah, take my life away, for I am no better than my forefathers.”5 Then he lay down and fell asleep under the broom tree. But suddenly an angel touched him and said to him: “Get up and eat.” 6 When he looked, there at his head was a round loaf on heated stones and a jug of water. He ate and drank and lay down again. 7 Later the angel of Jehovah came back a second time and touched him and said: “Get up and eat, for the journey will be too much for you.” 8 So he got up and ate and drank, and in the strength of that nourishment he went on for 40 days and 40 nights until he reached Hoʹreb, the mountain of the true God.9 There he entered a cave and spent the night; and look! Jehovah’s word came to him, telling him: “What are you doing here, E·liʹjah?” 10 To this he said: “I have been absolutely zealous for Jehovah the God of armies; for the people of Israel have forsaken your covenant, your altars they have torn down, and your prophets they have killed with the sword, and I am the only one left. Now they are seeking to take my life away.” 11 But He said: “Go out and stand on the mountain before Jehovah.” And look! Jehovah was passing by, and a great and strong wind was splitting mountains and breaking crags before Jehovah, but Jehovah was not in the wind. After the wind, there was an earthquake, but Jehovah was not in the earthquake. 12 After the earthquake, there was a fire, but Jehovah was not in the fire. After the fire, there was a calm, low voice. 13 As soon as E·liʹjah heard it, he wrapped his face in his official garment and went out and stood at the entrance of the cave. Then a voice asked him: “What are you doing here, E·liʹjah?” 14 To this he said: “I have been absolutely zealous for Jehovah the God of armies; for the people of Israel have forsaken your covenant, your altars they have torn down, and your prophets they have killed with the sword, and I am the only one left. Now they are seeking to take my life away.”15 Jehovah said to him: “Return, and go to the wilderness of Damascus. When you arrive, anoint Hazʹa·el as king over Syria. 16 And you should anoint Jeʹhu the grandson of Nimʹshi as king over Israel, and you should anoint E·liʹsha the son of Shaʹphat from Aʹbel-me·hoʹlah as prophet to take your place. 17 Anyone escaping from Hazʹa·el’s sword, Jeʹhu will put to death; and anyone escaping from Jeʹhu’s sword, E·liʹsha will put to death. 18 And I still have left 7,000 in Israel, all whose knees have not bent down to Baʹal and whose mouths have not kissed him.”19 So he went from there and found E·liʹsha the son of Shaʹphat while he was plowing with 12 pairs of bulls ahead of him, and he was with the 12th pair. So E·liʹjah went over to him and threw his official garment on him. 20 At that he left the bulls and ran after E·liʹjah and said: “Please, let me kiss my father and my mother. Then I will follow you.” He replied to him: “Go, return, for what have I done to stop you?” 21 So he went back and took a pair of bulls and sacrificed them, and he used the plowing gear to boil the meat of the bulls and gave it to the people, and they ate. After that he rose up and followed E·liʹjah and began to minister to him.
2 When the time of David’s death drew near, he gave his son Solʹo·mon these instructions: 2 “I am about to die. Therefore, be strong and prove yourself a man. 3 You must keep your obligation to Jehovah your God by walking in his ways and by observing his statutes, his commandments, his judgments, and his reminders as they are written in the Law of Moses; then you will succeed in everything you do and everywhere you turn. 4 And Jehovah will carry out his promise that he made concerning me: ‘If your sons pay attention to their way by walking faithfully before me with all their heart and soul, there will never fail to be a man of your line sitting on the throne of Israel.’5 “You also well know what Joʹab the son of Ze·ruʹiah did to me, what he did to two chiefs of the armies of Israel—Abʹner the son of Ner and A·maʹsa the son of Jeʹther. He killed them, shedding the blood of war in peacetime, and he put the blood of war on the belt around his waist and on the sandals on his feet. 6 You must act according to your wisdom and not let his gray hairs go down in peace to the Grave.7 “But toward the sons of Bar·zilʹlai the Gilʹe·ad·ite, you should show loyal love, and they should be among those eating at your table, for that was how they stood by me when I ran away from your brother Abʹsa·lom.8 “There is also with you Shimʹe·i the son of Geʹra the Benʹja·min·ite from Ba·huʹrim. He was the one who cursed me with a vicious curse on the day that I was going to Ma·ha·naʹim; but when he came down to meet me at the Jordan, I swore to him by Jehovah: ‘I will not put you to death by the sword.’ 9 Now do not leave him unpunished, for you are a wise man and you know what you should do to him; you must bring his gray hairs down to the Grave with blood.”10 Then David was laid to rest with his forefathers and was buried in the City of David. 11 The length of David’s reign over Israel was 40 years. In Hebʹron he reigned for 7 years, and in Jerusalem he reigned for 33 years.12 Solʹo·mon then sat down on the throne of David his father, and gradually his kingship became firmly established.13 In time Ad·o·niʹjah the son of Hagʹgith came to Bath-sheʹba, Solʹo·mon’s mother. She asked: “Is your coming peaceable?” He replied: “It is peaceable.” 14 He then said: “I have something to say to you.” So she said: “Speak.” 15 He continued: “You well know that the kingship was to become mine, and all Israel expected me to become king; but the kingship eluded me and became my brother’s, for it was from Jehovah that it became his. 16 But now there is just one request that I am making of you. Do not turn me away.” So she said to him: “Speak.” 17 He then said: “Please, ask Solʹo·mon the king—for he will not turn you away—to give me Abʹi·shag the Shuʹnam·mite as a wife.” 18 To this Bath-sheʹba said: “Very well! I will speak for you to the king.”19 So Bath-sheʹba went in to King Solʹo·mon to speak to him for Ad·o·niʹjah. At once the king rose to meet her and bowed down to her. Then he sat down on his throne and had a throne set for the king’s mother, so that she could sit at his right. 20 She then said: “There is one small request that I am making of you. Do not turn me away.” So the king said to her: “Make it, my mother; for I will not turn you away.” 21 She said: “Let Abʹi·shag the Shuʹnam·mite be given as a wife to your brother Ad·o·niʹjah.” 22 At this King Solʹo·mon answered his mother: “Why are you requesting Abʹi·shag the Shuʹnam·mite for Ad·o·niʹjah? You may as well request the kingship for him, for he is my older brother, and supporting him are A·biʹa·thar the priest and Joʹab the son of Ze·ruʹiah.”23 With that King Solʹo·mon swore by Jehovah: “So may God do to me and add to it if it was not at the cost of his own life that Ad·o·niʹjah made this request. 24 And now, as surely as Jehovah is living, who has firmly established me and seated me on the throne of David my father and who made a house for me, just as he promised, Ad·o·niʹjah will be put to death today.” 25 King Solʹo·mon immediately sent Be·naiʹah the son of Je·hoiʹa·da, who went out and struck Ad·o·niʹjah down, and he died.26 To A·biʹa·thar the priest, the king said: “Go to your fields in Anʹa·thoth! You deserve to die, but on this day I will not put you to death because you carried the Ark of the Sovereign Lord Jehovah before David my father and because you shared in all the hardships that my father suffered.” 27 So Solʹo·mon drove A·biʹa·thar out from serving as a priest of Jehovah, to fulfill Jehovah’s word against the house of Eʹli in Shiʹloh.28 When the news reached Joʹab—for Joʹab had supported Ad·o·niʹjah but he had not supported Abʹsa·lom—Joʹab fled to the tent of Jehovah and grabbed hold of the horns of the altar. 29 Then King Solʹo·mon was told: “Joʹab has fled to the tent of Jehovah, and he is there beside the altar.” So Solʹo·mon sent Be·naiʹah the son of Je·hoiʹa·da, saying: “Go, strike him down!” 30 So Be·naiʹah went to the tent of Jehovah and said to him: “This is what the king says, ‘Come out!’” But he said: “No! I will die here.” Be·naiʹah brought word back to the king: “This is what Joʹab said, and this is what he answered me.” 31 Then the king said to him: “Do just as he said; strike him down and bury him and remove from me and from the house of my father the blood that Joʹab spilled without just cause. 32 Jehovah will bring his blood back on his own head, for without my father David’s knowledge, he struck down and killed with the sword two men more righteous and better than he was: Abʹner the son of Ner, the chief of the army of Israel, and A·maʹsa the son of Jeʹther, the chief of the army of Judah. 33 Their blood will come back on the head of Joʹab and on the head of his offspring forever; but for David, his offspring, his house, and his throne, may there be peace from Jehovah forever.” 34 Then Be·naiʹah the son of Je·hoiʹa·da went up and struck Joʹab down and put him to death, and he was buried at his own house in the wilderness. 35 Then the king appointed Be·naiʹah the son of Je·hoiʹa·da over the army in his place, and the king appointed Zaʹdok the priest in place of A·biʹa·thar.36 Then the king summoned Shimʹe·i and said to him: “Build yourself a house in Jerusalem, and live there; do not go out from there to any other place. 37 On the day you go out and cross the Kidʹron Valley, you can be sure that you will die. Your blood will be on your own head.” 38 Shimʹe·i replied to the king: “What you have said is fair. Your servant will do just as my lord the king has said.” So Shimʹe·i stayed in Jerusalem for many days.39 But at the end of three years, two of Shimʹe·i’s slaves ran away to Aʹchish the son of Maʹa·cah the king of Gath. When Shimʹe·i was told: “Look! Your slaves are in Gath,” 40 Shimʹe·i immediately saddled his donkey and went to see Aʹchish in Gath to find his slaves. When Shimʹe·i returned from Gath with his slaves, 41 Solʹo·mon was told: “Shimʹe·i has gone out of Jerusalem to Gath and has returned.” 42 At that the king summoned Shimʹe·i and said to him: “Did I not put you under oath by Jehovah and warn you: ‘On the day you go out from here to any other place, you can be sure that you will die’? And did you not say to me, ‘What you are saying is fair; I will obey’? 43 Why, then, did you not keep the oath of Jehovah and the commandment that I imposed on you?” 44 The king then said to Shimʹe·i: “You know in your heart all the injury that you did to David my father, and Jehovah will bring back that injury on your own head. 45 But King Solʹo·mon will be blessed, and the throne of David will be firmly established before Jehovah forever.” 46 With that the king commanded Be·naiʹah the son of Je·hoiʹa·da, who went out and struck him down, and he died.Thus the kingdom was firmly established in the hand of Solʹo·mon.
20 Now King Ben-haʹdad of Syria gathered his whole army together along with 32 other kings and their horses and chariots; he went up and laid siege to Sa·marʹi·a and fought against it. 2 Then he sent messengers to King Aʹhab of Israel at the city and said to him: “This is what Ben-haʹdad says, 3 ‘Your silver and your gold are mine, as well as the best of your wives and your sons.’” 4 To this the king of Israel answered: “According to your word, my lord the king, I am yours along with all that belongs to me.”5 The messengers later came back and said: “This is what Ben-haʹdad says, ‘I sent this message to you: “Your silver, your gold, your wives, and your sons you will give me.” 6 But about this time tomorrow I will send my servants to you, and they will carefully search your house and the houses of your servants, and all your desirable things they will seize and take away.’”7 At that the king of Israel called all the elders of the land and said: “Take note, please, and see that this man is bent on bringing calamity, for he demanded my wives, my sons, my silver, and my gold, and I did not refuse him.” 8 Then all the elders and all the people said to him: “Do not obey, and do not consent.” 9 So he said to the messengers of Ben-haʹdad: “Say to my lord the king, ‘All that you first demanded of your servant I will do, but this I cannot do.’” With that the messengers went off and brought word back to him.10 Ben-haʹdad now sent him this message: “So may the gods do to me and add to it if there is enough dust in Sa·marʹi·a to give each of the people following me a handful!” 11 The king of Israel answered: “Tell him, ‘The one who puts on his armor should not boast about himself like one who takes it off.’” 12 As soon as he heard this reply, while he and the kings were drinking in their tents, he said to his servants: “Get ready to attack!” So they got ready to attack the city.13 But a prophet approached King Aʹhab of Israel and said: “This is what Jehovah says, ‘Have you seen all this large crowd? Here I am giving it into your hand today, and then you will know that I am Jehovah.’” 14 Aʹhab asked: “By whom?” to which he said: “This is what Jehovah says, ‘By the attendants of the princes of the provinces.’” So he asked: “Who will start the battle?” to which he said: “You!”15 Aʹhab then counted the attendants of the princes of the provinces, and they were 232; after that, he counted all the Israelite men, 7,000. 16 They went out at noon while Ben-haʹdad was drinking himself drunk in the tents along with the 32 kings who were helping him. 17 When the attendants of the princes of the provinces came out first, Ben-haʹdad at once sent messengers. They reported to him: “Men have come out from Sa·marʹi·a.” 18 At that he said: “If they have come out for peace, take them alive; or if they have come out for battle, you should still take them alive.” 19 But when these came out of the city—the attendants of the princes of the provinces and the armies that were following them— 20 each one struck down his opponent. Then the Syrians fled, and Israel pursued them, but King Ben-haʹdad of Syria escaped on a horse with some of the horsemen. 21 But the king of Israel went out and kept striking down the horses and the chariots, and he inflicted a great defeat on the Syrians.22 Later the prophet approached the king of Israel and said to him: “Go, strengthen yourself and consider what you are going to do, for at the start of the next year the king of Syria will come up against you.”23 Now the servants of the king of Syria said to him: “Their God is a God of mountains. That is why they overpowered us. But if we fight against them on level land, we will overpower them. 24 Also do this: Remove all the kings from their places, and replace them with governors. 25 Then gather an army equal to the army you lost, horse for horse and chariot for chariot. Let us fight against them on level land, and we will surely overpower them.” So he listened to their advice and did just that.26 At the start of the year, Ben-haʹdad mustered the Syrians and went up to Aʹphek for battle against Israel. 27 The people of Israel were also mustered and supplied, and they went out to meet them. When the people of Israel camped in front of them, they were like two tiny flocks of goats, while the Syrians filled the whole land. 28 Then the man of the true God approached the king of Israel and said: “This is what Jehovah says, ‘Because the Syrians have said: “Jehovah is a God of mountains, and he is not a God of plains,” I will give all this large crowd into your hand, and you will certainly know that I am Jehovah.’”29 They remained encamped opposite each other for seven days, and on the seventh day the battle began. The people of Israel struck down 100,000 Syrian foot soldiers in one day. 30 And the rest fled to Aʹphek, into the city. But the wall fell down on 27,000 of the men who were left. Ben-haʹdad also fled and came into the city, and he hid in an inner room.31 So his servants said to him: “Look, we have heard that the kings of the house of Israel are merciful kings. Please, let us wear sackcloth on our hips and put ropes on our heads and go out to the king of Israel. Perhaps he will spare your life.” 32 So they wore sackcloth around their hips and ropes on their heads and came in to the king of Israel and said: “Your servant Ben-haʹdad says, ‘Please, let me live.’” He replied: “Is he still alive? He is my brother.” 33 The men took it as an omen and quickly took him at his word, so they said: “Ben-haʹdad is your brother.” At that he said: “Go and get him.” Then Ben-haʹdad went out to him, and he had him get up into the chariot.34 Ben-haʹdad now said to him: “The cities that my father took from your father I will return, and you may establish markets for yourself in Damascus, just as my father did in Sa·marʹi·a.”Aʹhab replied: “On the basis of this agreement, I will let you go.”With that he made an agreement with him and let him go.35 By the word of Jehovah, one of the sons of the prophets said to his companion: “Strike me, please.” But the man refused to strike him. 36 So he said to him: “Because you did not listen to the voice of Jehovah, as soon as you leave me, a lion will kill you.” After he left him, a lion came upon him and killed him.37 He found another man and said: “Strike me, please.” So the man struck him and wounded him.38 Then the prophet went and waited for the king by the road, disguising himself with a bandage over his eyes. 39 As the king was passing by, he cried out to the king: “Your servant went into the thick of the battle, and there was a man coming out who brought a man to me and said, ‘Guard this man. If he is found missing, your life will have to take the place of his life, or else you will pay a talent of silver.’ 40 And while your servant was busy here and there, suddenly the man was gone.” The king of Israel said to him: “So your own judgment will be; you have decided it yourself.” 41 Then he quickly removed the bandage from his eyes, and the king of Israel recognized that he was one of the prophets. 42 He said to him: “This is what Jehovah says, ‘Because you have let the man whom I said should be destroyed escape from your hand, your life must take the place of his life, and your people the place of his people.’” 43 At that the king of Israel went home to Sa·marʹi·a, sullen and dejected.
21 After these things, an incident took place concerning a vineyard that belonged to Naʹboth the Jezʹre·el·ite; it was in Jezʹre·el, next to the palace of Aʹhab the king of Sa·marʹi·a. 2 Aʹhab said to Naʹboth: “Give me your vineyard for me to use as a vegetable garden, for it is near my house. Then I will give you a better vineyard to replace it. Or if you prefer, I will give you its value in money.” 3 But Naʹboth said to Aʹhab: “It is unthinkable, from Jehovah’s standpoint, for me to give you the inheritance of my forefathers.” 4 So Aʹhab came into his house, sullen and dejected over the answer that Naʹboth the Jezʹre·el·ite had given him when he said: “I will not give you the inheritance of my forefathers.” Then he lay down on his bed, kept his face turned away, and refused to eat.5 His wife Jezʹe·bel came in to him and asked him: “Why are you so sad that you refuse to eat?” 6 He replied to her: “Because I said to Naʹboth the Jezʹre·el·ite, ‘Give me your vineyard for money. Or if you prefer, let me give you another vineyard to replace it.’ But he said, ‘I will not give you my vineyard.’” 7 His wife Jezʹe·bel said to him: “Are you not the one ruling as king over Israel? Get up, eat something, and let your heart be cheerful. I will give you the vineyard of Naʹboth the Jezʹre·el·ite.” 8 So she wrote letters in Aʹhab’s name and sealed them with his seal and sent the letters to the elders and the nobles who lived in Naʹboth’s city. 9 She wrote in the letters: “Proclaim a fast, and have Naʹboth sit at the head of the people. 10 And have two good-for-nothing men sit in front of him and testify against him, saying, ‘You have cursed God and the king!’ Then bring him out and stone him to death.”11 So the men of his city, the elders and the nobles who lived in his city, did just as was written in the letters that Jezʹe·bel sent to them. 12 They proclaimed a fast and had Naʹboth sit at the head of the people. 13 Then two of the good-for-nothing men came in and sat down in front of him and began to testify against Naʹboth in front of the people, saying: “Naʹboth has cursed God and the king!” After that they brought him to the outskirts of the city and stoned him to death. 14 They now sent word to Jezʹe·bel, saying: “Naʹboth has been stoned to death.”15 As soon as Jezʹe·bel heard that Naʹboth had been stoned to death, she said to Aʹhab: “Get up, take possession of the vineyard of Naʹboth the Jezʹre·el·ite, which he refused to give you for money, for Naʹboth is no longer alive. He is dead.” 16 As soon as Aʹhab heard that Naʹboth was dead, Aʹhab got up to go down to the vineyard of Naʹboth the Jezʹre·el·ite to take possession of it.17 But Jehovah’s word came to E·liʹjah the Tishʹbite, saying: 18 “Get up, go down to meet Aʹhab the king of Israel, who is in Sa·marʹi·a. There he is in the vineyard of Naʹboth, where he has gone to take possession of it. 19 You must tell him, ‘This is what Jehovah says: “Have you murdered a man and also taken his property?”’ Then say to him, ‘This is what Jehovah says: “In the place where the dogs licked up the blood of Naʹboth, the dogs will lick up your own blood.”’”20 Aʹhab said to E·liʹjah: “So you have found me, O my enemy!” He replied: “I have found you. ‘Because you are determined to do what is bad in the eyes of Jehovah, 21 here I am bringing calamity upon you, and I will make a clean sweep after you and will annihilate from Aʹhab every male, including the helpless and weak in Israel. 22 And I will make your house like the house of Jer·o·boʹam the son of Neʹbat and like the house of Baʹa·sha the son of A·hiʹjah, for you have provoked my anger and have caused Israel to sin.’ 23 Also concerning Jezʹe·bel, Jehovah has said: ‘The dogs will eat up Jezʹe·bel in the plot of land of Jezʹre·el. 24 Anyone belonging to Aʹhab who dies in the city the dogs will eat up, and anyone who dies in the field the birds of the heavens will eat up. 25 Indeed, there has never been anyone like Aʹhab, who was so determined to do what was bad in the eyes of Jehovah, egged on by his wife Jezʹe·bel. 26 He acted in the most detestable way by going after the disgusting idols, just as all the Amʹor·ites had done, whom Jehovah drove out from before the Israelites.’”27 As soon as Aʹhab heard these words, he ripped his garments apart and put sackcloth on his body; and he went on a fast and kept lying down in sackcloth and walking despondently. 28 Jehovah’s word then came to E·liʹjah the Tishʹbite: 29 “Have you seen how Aʹhab has humbled himself on my account? Because he has humbled himself before me, I will not bring the calamity during his lifetime. I will bring the calamity upon his house in the days of his son.”
22 For three years there was no war between Syria and Israel. 2 In the third year King Je·hoshʹa·phat of Judah went down to the king of Israel. 3 Then the king of Israel said to his servants: “Do you know that Raʹmoth-gilʹe·ad belongs to us? And yet we are hesitating to take it back from the king of Syria.” 4 He then said to Je·hoshʹa·phat: “Will you go with me to fight at Raʹmoth-gilʹe·ad?” Je·hoshʹa·phat replied to the king of Israel: “I am the same as you. My people are the same as your people. My horses are the same as your horses.”5 But Je·hoshʹa·phat said to the king of Israel: “First inquire, please, for the word of Jehovah.” 6 So the king of Israel gathered the prophets together, about 400 men, and said to them: “Should I go to war against Raʹmoth-gilʹe·ad, or should I refrain?” They said: “Go up, and Jehovah will give it into the king’s hand.”7 Je·hoshʹa·phat then said: “Is there not here a prophet of Jehovah? Let us also inquire through him.” 8 At that the king of Israel said to Je·hoshʹa·phat: “There is still one more man through whom we can inquire of Jehovah; but I hate him, for he never prophesies good things concerning me, only bad. He is Mi·caiʹah the son of Imʹlah.” However, Je·hoshʹa·phat said: “The king should not say such a thing.”9 So the king of Israel called a court official and said: “Bring Mi·caiʹah the son of Imʹlah quickly.” 10 Now the king of Israel and Je·hoshʹa·phat the king of Judah were each sitting on his throne, dressed in royal attire, at the threshing floor at the entrance of the gate of Sa·marʹi·a, and all the prophets were prophesying before them. 11 Then Zed·e·kiʹah the son of Che·naʹa·nah made for himself iron horns and said: “This is what Jehovah says, ‘With these you will gore the Syrians until you exterminate them.’” 12 All the other prophets were prophesying the same way, saying: “Go up to Raʹmoth-gilʹe·ad and you will be successful; Jehovah will give it into the king’s hand.”13 So the messenger who went to call Mi·caiʹah said to him: “Look! The words of the prophets are unanimously favorable to the king. Let your word, please, become like their words, and speak favorably.” 14 But Mi·caiʹah said: “As surely as Jehovah is living, whatever Jehovah says to me is what I will speak.” 15 Then he came in to the king, and the king asked him: “Mi·caiʹah, should we go to war against Raʹmoth-gilʹe·ad, or should we refrain?” At once he replied: “Go up and you will be successful; Jehovah will give it into the king’s hand.” 16 At that the king said to him: “How many times must I put you under oath not to speak to me anything but the truth in the name of Jehovah?” 17 So he said: “I see all the Israelites scattered on the mountains, like sheep that have no shepherd. Jehovah said: ‘These have no master. Let each one go back to his house in peace.’”18 Then the king of Israel said to Je·hoshʹa·phat: “Did I not tell you, ‘He will not prophesy good things concerning me, only bad’?”19 Mi·caiʹah then said: “Therefore, hear the word of Jehovah: I saw Jehovah sitting on his throne and all the army of the heavens standing by him, to his right and to his left. 20 Jehovah then said, ‘Who will fool Aʹhab, so that he will go up and fall at Raʹmoth-gilʹe·ad?’ And one was saying one thing while another said something else. 21 Then a spirit came forward and stood before Jehovah and said, ‘I will fool him.’ Jehovah asked him, ‘How will you do it?’ 22 He replied, ‘I will go out and become a deceptive spirit in the mouth of all his prophets.’ So he said, ‘You will fool him, and what is more, you will be successful. Go out and do that.’ 23 And now Jehovah has put a deceptive spirit in the mouth of all these prophets of yours, but Jehovah has declared calamity for you.”24 Zed·e·kiʹah the son of Che·naʹa·nah now approached and struck Mi·caiʹah on the cheek and said: “Which way did the spirit of Jehovah pass from me to speak with you?” 25 Mi·caiʹah replied: “Look! You will see which way on the day when you will enter the innermost room to hide.” 26 Then the king of Israel said: “Take Mi·caiʹah and turn him over to Aʹmon the chief of the city and to Joʹash the king’s son. 27 Tell them, ‘This is what the king says: “Put this fellow in the prison and feed him with a reduced allowance of bread and water until I return in peace.”’” 28 But Mi·caiʹah said: “If you do return in peace, Jehovah has not spoken with me.” Then he added: “Take note, all you peoples.”29 So the king of Israel and Je·hoshʹa·phat the king of Judah went up to Raʹmoth-gilʹe·ad. 30 The king of Israel now said to Je·hoshʹa·phat: “I will disguise myself and will go into the battle, but you should put on your royal attire.” So the king of Israel disguised himself and entered the battle. 31 Now the king of Syria had ordered his 32 chariot commanders: “Do not fight with anyone, small or great, except the king of Israel.” 32 And as soon as the chariot commanders saw Je·hoshʹa·phat, they said to themselves: “Surely it is the king of Israel.” So they turned to fight against him; and Je·hoshʹa·phat began to cry for help. 33 When the chariot commanders saw that it was not the king of Israel, they immediately turned back from following him.34 But one man shot his bow at random, and he struck the king of Israel between the joints of his coat of mail. So the king said to his charioteer: “Turn around and take me out of the battle, for I have been badly wounded.” 35 The fighting raged throughout that day, and the king had to be propped up in the chariot, facing the Syrians. The blood of the wound poured out into the interior of the war chariot, and he died in the evening. 36 Around sunset a cry passed through the camp, saying: “Everyone to his city! Everyone to his land!” 37 Thus the king died, and he was brought to Sa·marʹi·a; they buried the king in Sa·marʹi·a. 38 When they washed off the war chariot by the pool of Sa·marʹi·a, the dogs licked up his blood and the prostitutes bathed there, according to the word that Jehovah had spoken.39 As for the rest of the history of Aʹhab, all that he did and the house of ivory that he built and all the cities that he built, is it not written in the book of the history of the times of the kings of Israel? 40 Then Aʹhab was laid to rest with his forefathers; and his son A·ha·ziʹah became king in his place.41 Je·hoshʹa·phat the son of Aʹsa had become king over Judah in the fourth year of King Aʹhab of Israel. 42 Je·hoshʹa·phat was 35 years old when he became king, and he reigned for 25 years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was A·zuʹbah the daughter of Shilʹhi. 43 He kept walking in all the way of Aʹsa his father. He did not deviate from it, and he did what was right in Jehovah’s eyes. However, the high places were not removed, and the people were still sacrificing and making sacrificial smoke on the high places. 44 Je·hoshʹa·phat kept peaceful relations with the king of Israel. 45 As for the rest of the history of Je·hoshʹa·phat, his mighty exploits and how he waged war, is it not written in the book of the history of the times of the kings of Judah? 46 He also cleared out of the land the rest of the male temple prostitutes who had been left over in the days of Aʹsa his father.47 Then there was no king in Eʹdom; a deputy was acting as king.48 Je·hoshʹa·phat also made Tarʹshish ships to go to Oʹphir for gold, but they did not go because the ships were wrecked at Eʹzi·on-geʹber. 49 It was then that A·ha·ziʹah the son of Aʹhab said to Je·hoshʹa·phat: “Let my servants go with your servants in the ships,” but Je·hoshʹa·phat did not consent.50 Then Je·hoshʹa·phat was laid to rest with his forefathers and was buried with his forefathers in the City of David his forefather; and his son Je·hoʹram became king in his place.51 A·ha·ziʹah the son of Aʹhab became king over Israel in Sa·marʹi·a in the 17th year of King Je·hoshʹa·phat of Judah, and he reigned over Israel for two years. 52 And he kept doing what was bad in Jehovah’s eyes and walking in the way of his father and his mother and in the way of Jer·o·boʹam the son of Neʹbat, who had caused Israel to sin. 53 He continued serving Baʹal and bowing down to him and kept offending Jehovah the God of Israel, just as his father had done.
3 Solʹo·mon made a marriage alliance with Pharʹaoh king of Egypt. He married Pharʹaoh’s daughter and brought her to the City of David until he finished building his own house, and the house of Jehovah, and the wall around Jerusalem. 2 But the people were still sacrificing on the high places, because until that time a house for the name of Jehovah had not yet been built. 3 Solʹo·mon continued to love Jehovah by walking in the statutes of David his father, except that he was sacrificing and making offerings smoke on the high places.4 The king went to Gibʹe·on to sacrifice there, for that was the most prominent high place. Solʹo·mon offered 1,000 burnt sacrifices on that altar. 5 In Gibʹe·on Jehovah appeared to Solʹo·mon in a dream by night, and God said: “Ask what you would like me to give you.” 6 At this Solʹo·mon said: “You have shown great loyal love toward your servant David my father as he walked before you in faithfulness and in righteousness and in uprightness of heart. You have continued to show him this great loyal love down to this day by giving him a son to sit on his throne. 7 And now, Jehovah my God, you have made your servant king in the place of David my father, though I am just a youth and I am inexperienced. 8 Your servant is among your people whom you have chosen, a people so vast that they cannot be numbered or counted. 9 So grant your servant an obedient heart to judge your people, to discern between good and bad, for who is able to judge this numerous people of yours?”10 It was pleasing to Jehovah that Solʹo·mon had requested this. 11 God then said to him: “Because you requested this and you did not request for yourself long life or riches or the death of your enemies, but you requested understanding to hear judicial cases, 12 I will do what you asked. I will give you a wise and understanding heart, so that just as there has never been anyone like you before, there will never be anyone like you again. 13 Furthermore, what you have not requested I will give you, both riches and glory, so that there will be no other king like you in your lifetime. 14 And if you walk in my ways by keeping my regulations and my commandments, just as David your father walked, I will also give you a long life.”15 When Solʹo·mon awoke, he realized that it had been a dream. Then he went to Jerusalem and stood before the ark of the covenant of Jehovah and offered up burnt sacrifices and communion offerings and spread a feast for all his servants.16 At that time two prostitutes came in to the king and stood before him. 17 The first woman said: “Please, my lord, this woman and I live in one house, and I gave birth while she was in the house. 18 On the third day after I gave birth, this woman also gave birth. We were together, just the two of us; there was no one else with us in the house. 19 During the night this woman’s son died, because she lay on him. 20 So she got up in the middle of the night and took my son from my side while your slave girl was asleep and laid him in her arms, and she laid her dead son in my arms. 21 When I got up in the morning to nurse my son, I saw that he was dead. So I examined him closely in the morning and saw that it was not my son whom I had given birth to.” 22 But the other woman said: “No, my son is the living one, and your son is the dead one!” But the first woman was saying: “No, your son is the dead one, and my son is the living one.” That is how they argued before the king.23 Finally the king said: “This one says, ‘This is my son, the living one, and your son is the dead one!’ and that one says, ‘No, your son is the dead one, and my son is the living one!’” 24 The king said: “Bring me a sword.” So they brought a sword to the king. 25 The king then said: “Cut the living child in two, and give half to one woman and half to the other.” 26 At once the woman whose son was the living one pleaded with the king, for her compassions were stirred toward her son. She said: “Please, my lord! You should give her the living child! By no means put him to death!” But the other woman was saying: “He will be neither mine nor yours! Let them cut him in two!” 27 At that the king answered: “Give the living child to the first woman! By no means put him to death, for she is his mother.”28 So all Israel heard about the judgment that the king had handed down, and they were in awe of the king, for they saw that the wisdom of God was with him to execute justice.
4 King Solʹo·mon ruled over all Israel. 2 These were his high officials: Az·a·riʹah the son of Zaʹdok was the priest; 3 El·i·horʹeph and A·hiʹjah the sons of Shiʹsha were secretaries; Je·hoshʹa·phat the son of A·hiʹlud was the recorder; 4 Be·naiʹah the son of Je·hoiʹa·da was in charge of the army; Zaʹdok and A·biʹa·thar were priests; 5 Az·a·riʹah the son of Nathan was over the deputies; Zaʹbud the son of Nathan was a priest and the king’s friend; 6 A·hiʹshar was over the household; and Ad·o·niʹram the son of Abʹda was over those conscripted for forced labor.7 Solʹo·mon had 12 deputies in charge of all Israel who provided the king and his household with food. Each one was responsible for providing the food for one month of the year. 8 These were their names: The son of Hur, in the mountainous region of Eʹphra·im; 9 the son of Deʹker, in Maʹkaz, Sha·alʹbim, Beth-sheʹmesh, and Eʹlon-beth-haʹnan; 10 the son of Heʹsed, in A·rubʹboth (he had Soʹcoh and all the land of Heʹpher); 11 the son of A·binʹa·dab, in all the slopes of Dor (Solʹo·mon’s daughter Taʹphath became his wife); 12 Baʹa·na the son of A·hiʹlud, in Taʹa·nach, Me·gidʹdo, and all Beth-sheʹan, which is beside Zarʹe·than below Jezʹre·el, from Beth-sheʹan to Aʹbel-me·hoʹlah to the region of Jokʹme·am; 13 the son of Geʹber, in Raʹmoth-gilʹe·ad (he had the tent villages of Jaʹir the son of Ma·nasʹseh, which are in Gilʹe·ad; he also had the region of Arʹgob, which is in Baʹshan: 60 large cities with walls and copper bars); 14 A·hinʹa·dab the son of Idʹdo, in Ma·ha·naʹim; 15 A·himʹa·az, in Naphʹta·li (he took Basʹe·math, another of Solʹo·mon’s daughters, as his wife); 16 Baʹa·na the son of Huʹshai, in Ashʹer and Be·aʹloth; 17 Je·hoshʹa·phat the son of Pa·ruʹah, in Isʹsa·char; 18 Shimʹe·i the son of Eʹla, in Benjamin; 19 Geʹber the son of Uʹri, in the land of Gilʹe·ad, the land of Siʹhon king of the Amʹor·ites and of Og king of Baʹshan. There was also one deputy in charge of all these other deputies in the land.20 Judah and Israel were as numerous as the grains of sand by the sea; they were eating and drinking and rejoicing.21 Solʹo·mon ruled over all the kingdoms from the River to the land of the Phi·lisʹtines and to the boundary of Egypt. They brought tribute and served Solʹo·mon all the days of his life.22 Solʹo·mon’s food for each day was 30 cor measures of fine flour and 60 cor measures of flour, 23 10 fattened cattle, 20 pastured cattle, and 100 sheep, besides some stags, gazelles, roebucks, and fattened cuckoos. 24 For he controlled everything this side of the River, from Tiphʹsah to Gazʹa, including all the kings on this side of the River; and he enjoyed peace in every region, all around him. 25 Judah and Israel lived in security, everyone under his own vine and under his own fig tree, from Dan to Beʹer-sheʹba, all the days of Solʹo·mon.26 And Solʹo·mon had 4,000 stalls of horses for his chariots and 12,000 horses.27 These deputies supplied food to King Solʹo·mon and to everyone who ate at the table of King Solʹo·mon. Each was responsible for his month and saw to it that nothing was lacking. 28 They also brought barley and straw wherever it was needed for the horses and for the teams of horses, each according to his quota.29 And God gave Solʹo·mon wisdom and discernment in very great measure and a broadness of heart like the sand on the seashore. 30 Solʹo·mon’s wisdom surpassed the wisdom of all the people of the East and all the wisdom of Egypt. 31 He was wiser than any other man, wiser than Eʹthan the Ezʹra·hite and Heʹman, Calʹcol, and Darʹda, the sons of Maʹhol; his fame spread among all the surrounding nations. 32 He composed 3,000 proverbs and his songs numbered 1,005. 33 He would speak about the trees, from the cedar in Lebʹa·non to the hyssop that grows on the wall; he would speak about the animals, the birds, the creeping things, and the fish. 34 People from all the nations came to hear Solʹo·mon’s wisdom, including kings from all over the earth who had heard about his wisdom.
5 When Hiʹram the king of Tyre heard that Solʹo·mon had been anointed as king in place of his father, he sent his servants to Solʹo·mon, for Hiʹram had always been a friend of David’s. 2 In turn Solʹo·mon sent word to Hiʹram: 3 “You well know that David my father was not able to build a house for the name of Jehovah his God because of the wars waged against him from every side until Jehovah put his enemies under the soles of his feet. 4 But now Jehovah my God has given me rest on all sides. There is no one opposing me and nothing bad happening. 5 So I intend to build a house for the name of Jehovah my God, just as Jehovah promised to David my father, saying: ‘Your son whom I will put on your throne in your place, he is the one who will build the house for my name.’ 6 Now command your people to cut cedars of Lebʹa·non for me. My servants will work with your servants, and I will pay the wages of your servants according to the rate you set, for you are aware that not one of us knows how to cut trees like the Si·doʹni·ans.”7 When Hiʹram heard Solʹo·mon’s words, he rejoiced greatly and said: “May Jehovah be praised today, for he has given David a wise son over this great people!” 8 So Hiʹram sent word to Solʹo·mon: “I have heard the message you sent to me. I will do all you desire in providing the cedar and juniper timbers. 9 My servants will bring them down from Lebʹa·non to the sea, and I will make them into log rafts to go by sea to the place that you designate to me. I will have them broken up there, and you can carry them away. In exchange, you will provide the food that I request for my household.”10 So Hiʹram supplied all the timbers of cedar and juniper that Solʹo·mon desired. 11 And Solʹo·mon gave Hiʹram 20,000 cor measures of wheat as food supplies for his household and 20 cor measures of very fine olive oil. That was what Solʹo·mon gave Hiʹram year after year. 12 And Jehovah gave Solʹo·mon wisdom, just as He had promised him. And there was peace between Hiʹram and Solʹo·mon, and the two of them made a treaty.13 King Solʹo·mon conscripted men for forced labor out of all Israel; 30,000 men were conscripted. 14 He would send them to Lebʹa·non in shifts of 10,000 each month. They would spend a month in Lebʹa·non and two months at their homes; and Ad·o·niʹram was over those conscripted for forced labor. 15 Solʹo·mon had 70,000 common laborers and 80,000 stonecutters in the mountains, 16 as well as Solʹo·mon’s 3,300 princely deputies who served as foremen to supervise the workmen. 17 At the king’s order, they quarried large stones, expensive stones, to lay the foundation of the house with hewn stones. 18 So Solʹo·mon’s builders and Hiʹram’s builders and the Geʹbal·ites did the cutting, and they prepared the timbers and the stones to build the house.
6 In the 480th year after the Israelites came out of the land of Egypt, in the fourth year after Solʹo·mon became king over Israel, in the month of Ziv (that is, the second month), he began to build the house of Jehovah. 2 The house that King Solʹo·mon built for Jehovah was 60 cubits long, 20 cubits wide, and 30 cubits high. 3 The porch in front of the temple was 20 cubits long, corresponding to the width of the house. Its depth was ten cubits from the front of the house.4 He made windows of narrowing frames for the house. 5 Further, he built a side structure against the wall of the house; it went around the walls of the house, those of the temple and the innermost room, and he made side chambers all around. 6 The lowest level of the side chambers was five cubits wide, the middle level was six cubits wide, and the third level was seven cubits wide, for he made offsets all around the house, so that nothing was attached to the walls of the house.7 The house was built with quarry stone that had already been prepared, so that no hammers or axes or any iron tools were heard in the house while it was being built. 8 The entrance of the lowest side chamber was on the south side of the house, and a winding staircase led up to the middle floor, and from the middle floor up to the third floor. 9 He continued building the house and finished it and covered the house with cedar beams and rows of cedar planks. 10 He built the side chambers all around the house, each five cubits high, and they were joined to the house by cedar timbers.11 Meanwhile, the word of Jehovah came to Solʹo·mon, saying: 12 “As for this house that you are building, if you walk in my statutes and carry out my judgments and observe all my commandments by walking in them, I will also carry out with you my promise that I made to David your father, 13 and I will reside in the midst of the Israelites, and I will not forsake my people Israel.”14 Solʹo·mon continued building the house to finish it. 15 He built the inside walls of the house with cedar boards. He paneled the inside walls with timber, from the floor of the house up to the rafters of the ceiling, and he overlaid the floor of the house with juniper boards. 16 And he built a section of 20 cubits at the rear of the house with cedar boards, from the floor up to the rafters, and he built inside of it the innermost room, the Most Holy. 17 And the temple—the part of the house in front of it—was 40 cubits. 18 The cedar inside the house was carved with gourds and flowers in bloom. All of it was cedar; no stone was seen.19 And he prepared the innermost room inside the house to put there the ark of the covenant of Jehovah. 20 The innermost room was 20 cubits long, 20 cubits wide, and 20 cubits high; and he overlaid it with pure gold; he overlaid the altar with cedar. 21 Solʹo·mon overlaid the interior of the house with pure gold, and he stretched gold chains in front of the innermost room, which was overlaid with gold. 22 He overlaid the whole house with gold until all the house was completed; he also overlaid with gold the entire altar near the innermost room.23 In the innermost room he made two cherubs of pinewood, each ten cubits high. 24 One wing of the cherub measured five cubits, and the other wing was five cubits. From the tip of one wing to the tip of the other wing was ten cubits. 25 The second cherub was also ten cubits. The two cherubs had the same size and shape. 26 The height of the one cherub was ten cubits, as was that of the other cherub. 27 Then he put the cherubs inside the inner house. The wings of the cherubs were extended so that the wing of the one cherub reached to one wall and the wing of the other cherub reached to the other wall, and their wings extended toward the middle of the house, so that the wings touched. 28 And he overlaid the cherubs with gold.29 And on all the walls of the house all around both the inner and outer rooms, he carved figures of cherubs, palm trees, and flowers in bloom. 30 He overlaid the floor of the house with gold in the inner and outer rooms. 31 And for the entrance of the innermost room he made doors of pinewood, side pillars, and doorposts, as a fifth part. 32 The two doors were of pinewood, and he carved on them cherubs, palm trees, and flowers in bloom, and he overlaid them with gold; and he hammered the gold down over the cherubs and the palm trees. 33 For the entrance of the temple, that was how he made the doorposts of pinewood, belonging to a fourth part. 34 And he made two doors of juniper wood. The one door had two leaves that turned on pivots, and the other door had two leaves that turned on pivots. 35 He carved cherubs, palm trees, and flowers in bloom, and overlaid gold foil on the carvings.36 He built the inner courtyard with three rows of hewn stone and a row of cedar beams.37 In the 4th year, in the month of Ziv, the house of Jehovah had its foundation laid; 38 and in the 11th year, in the month of Bul (that is, the eighth month), the house was finished in all its details and according to its plan. So he spent seven years building it.
7 And it took Solʹo·mon 13 years to build his own house, until his whole house was completed.2 And he built the House of the Forest of Lebʹa·non 100 cubits long, 50 cubits wide, and 30 cubits high on four rows of cedar pillars; and there were cedar beams on the pillars. 3 It was paneled above with cedar on the girders that rested on the pillars; they numbered 45, with 15 to a row. 4 There were three rows of framed windows, and each window was opposite another window in three tiers. 5 All the entrances and the doorposts had square frames, as did the front of the windows that were opposite each other in three tiers.6 And he built the Hall of Pillars 50 cubits long and 30 cubits wide, and there was a porch in front of it with pillars and a canopy.7 He also built the Hall of the Throne, where he would judge—the Hall of Judgment—and they paneled it with cedar from the floor to the rafters.8 The house where he was to live, at the other courtyard, was set back from the Hall, and it was similar in workmanship. He also built a house similar to this Hall for Pharʹaoh’s daughter, whom Solʹo·mon had taken as a wife.9 All of these were made of expensive stones hewn according to measure, trimmed with stonesaws inside and out, from the foundation up to the coping, and outside as far as the great courtyard. 10 And the foundation was laid with very large, expensive stones; some stones measured ten cubits, and other stones, eight cubits. 11 And above these were expensive stones, hewn according to measure, as well as cedar. 12 Around the great courtyard were three rows of hewn stone and a row of cedar beams, like that for the inner courtyard of the house of Jehovah and the porch of the house.13 King Solʹo·mon sent for Hiʹram and brought him from Tyre. 14 He was the son of a widow from the tribe of Naphʹta·li, and his father was a Tyrʹi·an coppersmith; and he had great skill, understanding, and experience for all kinds of work in copper. So he came to King Solʹo·mon and did all his work.15 He cast the two pillars of copper; each pillar was 18 cubits high, and it took a measuring cord 12 cubits long to encircle each of the two pillars. 16 And he made two capitals cast in copper to put on the tops of the pillars. One capital was five cubits high, and the other capital was five cubits high. 17 The capital on top of each pillar had mesh network with wreathed chains; seven for the one capital and seven for the other capital. 18 And he made pomegranates in two rows around the one network to cover the capitals that were on the top of the pillars; he did the same for both capitals. 19 The capitals on top of the pillars at the porch were of a lily pattern four cubits high. 20 The capitals were on the two pillars, just above the rounded portion adjoining the network; and there were 200 pomegranates in rows all around on each capital.21 He set up the pillars of the porch of the temple. He set up the right-hand pillar and named it Jaʹchin, and then he set up the left-hand pillar and named it Boʹaz. 22 And the top of the pillars were of a lily pattern. So the work of the pillars was completed.23 Then he made the Sea of cast metal. It was circular in shape, 10 cubits from brim to brim and 5 cubits high, and it took a measuring line 30 cubits long to encircle it. 24 And there were ornamental gourds below its brim, completely encircling it, ten to a cubit all around the Sea, with two rows of the gourds cast in one piece with it. 25 It stood on 12 bulls, 3 facing north, 3 facing west, 3 facing south, and 3 facing east; and the Sea rested on them, and all their hindquarters were toward the center. 26 And its thickness was a handbreadth; and its brim was made like the brim of a cup, like a lily blossom. It would hold 2,000 bath measures.27 Then he made the ten carriages of copper. Each carriage was four cubits long, four cubits wide, and three cubits high. 28 And this was how the carriages were constructed: They had side panels, and the side panels were between the crossbars. 29 And on the side panels between the crossbars were lions, bulls, and cherubs, and the same design was on the crossbars. Above and beneath the lions and the bulls were wreaths in relief. 30 And each carriage had four copper wheels and copper axles, and its four cornerpieces served as supports for them. Beneath the basin were the supports, cast with wreaths at the side of each. 31 Its opening was inside the crown, extending upward one cubit; and its opening was round, making up a stand of one and a half cubits, and on its mouth were engravings. And their side panels were square, not round. 32 The four wheels were below the side panels, and the supports of the wheels were attached to the carriage, and the height of each wheel was one and a half cubits. 33 And the wheels were made like chariot wheels. Their supports, rims, spokes, and hubs were all of cast metal. 34 There were four supports on the four corners of each carriage; its supports were cast as part of the carriage. 35 On top of the carriage was a circular band half a cubit high, and on the top of the carriage, its framing pieces and its side panels were cast as part of it. 36 On the surfaces of its framing pieces and on its side panels he engraved cherubs, lions, and palm trees according to the amount of space on each, with wreaths all around. 37 This is how he made the ten carriages; they were all cast alike, with the same measure and shape.38 He made ten copper basins; each could hold 40 bath measures. Each basin measured four cubits. There was one basin for each of the ten carriages. 39 Then he put five carriages on the right side of the house and five on the left side of the house, and he placed the Sea on the right side of the house, toward the southeast.40 Hiʹram also made the basins, the shovels, and the bowls. So Hiʹram finished all the work that he did for King Solʹo·mon on the house of Jehovah: 41 the two pillars and the bowl-shaped capitals that were on top of the two pillars; the two networks to cover the two bowl-shaped capitals that were on top of the pillars; 42 the 400 pomegranates for the two networks, two rows of pomegranates for each network, to cover the two bowl-shaped capitals that were on the two pillars; 43 the ten carriages and the ten basins on the carriages; 44 the Sea and the 12 bulls beneath the Sea; 45 and the cans, the shovels, the bowls, and all the utensils, which Hiʹram made of polished copper for King Solʹo·mon for the house of Jehovah. 46 The king cast them in clay molds in the district of the Jordan, between Sucʹcoth and Zarʹe·than.47 Solʹo·mon left all the utensils unweighed because they were in such great quantities. The weight of the copper was not ascertained. 48 Solʹo·mon made all the utensils for the house of Jehovah: the altar of gold; the gold table on which to put the showbread; 49 the lampstands of pure gold, five on the right and five on the left before the innermost room; and the blossoms, the lamps, and the snuffers, of gold; 50 the basins, the extinguishers, the bowls, the cups, and the fire holders, of pure gold; and the sockets for the doors of the inner house, that is, the Most Holy, and for the doors of the house of the temple, of gold.51 So King Solʹo·mon completed all the work he had to do for the house of Jehovah. Solʹo·mon then brought in the things that David his father had made holy, and he put the silver, the gold, and the articles into the treasuries of the house of Jehovah.
8 At that time Solʹo·mon congregated the elders of Israel, all the heads of the tribes, the chieftains of the paternal houses of Israel. They came to King Solʹo·mon at Jerusalem to bring up the ark of the covenant of Jehovah from the City of David, that is, Zion. 2 All the men of Israel assembled before King Solʹo·mon at the festival in the month of Ethʹa·nim, that is, the seventh month. 3 So all the elders of Israel came, and the priests lifted up the Ark. 4 They brought up the Ark of Jehovah, the tent of meeting, and all the holy utensils that were in the tent. The priests and the Levites brought them up. 5 King Solʹo·mon and the entire assembly of Israel, who had been summoned to meet with him, were before the Ark. So many sheep and cattle were being sacrificed that they could not be counted or numbered.6 Then the priests brought the ark of the covenant of Jehovah to its place, into the innermost room of the house, the Most Holy, underneath the wings of the cherubs.7 Thus the wings of the cherubs were spread out over the place of the Ark, so that the cherubs overshadowed the Ark and its poles. 8 The poles were so long that the tips of the poles were visible from the Holy in front of the innermost room, but they were not visible from outside. And they are there to this day. 9 There was nothing in the Ark but the two stone tablets that Moses placed there at Hoʹreb, when Jehovah made a covenant with the people of Israel while they were coming out of the land of Egypt.10 When the priests came out from the holy place, the cloud filled the house of Jehovah. 11 The priests were not able to stand to minister because of the cloud, for the glory of Jehovah filled the house of Jehovah. 12 At that time Solʹo·mon said: “Jehovah said he would reside in the thick gloom. 13 I have successfully built a lofty house for you, an established place for you to dwell in forever.”14 Then the king turned around and began to bless all the congregation of Israel while all the congregation of Israel stood. 15 He said: “May Jehovah the God of Israel be praised, the one who by his own mouth promised my father David, and by his own hand has given fulfillment, saying, 16 ‘From the day I brought my people Israel out of Egypt, I have not chosen a city out of all the tribes of Israel in which to build a house for my name to remain there, but I have chosen David to be over my people Israel.’ 17 And it was the heart’s desire of my father David to build a house for the name of Jehovah the God of Israel. 18 But Jehovah said to my father David, ‘It was your heart’s desire to build a house for my name, and you did well to desire this in your heart. 19 However, you will not build the house, but your own son who is to be born to you is the one who will build the house for my name.’ 20 Jehovah has carried out the promise that he made, for I have succeeded my father David and I sit on the throne of Israel, just as Jehovah promised. I have also built the house for the name of Jehovah the God of Israel 21 and have set up a place there for the Ark containing the covenant that Jehovah made with our forefathers when he was bringing them out of the land of Egypt.”22 Then Solʹo·mon stood before the altar of Jehovah in front of all the congregation of Israel, and he spread his hands out to the heavens, 23 and he said: “O Jehovah the God of Israel, there is no God like you in the heavens above or on the earth beneath, keeping the covenant and showing loyal love to your servants who are walking before you with all their heart. 24 You have kept the promise that you made to your servant David my father. You made the promise with your own mouth, and this day you have fulfilled it with your own hand. 25 And now, O Jehovah the God of Israel, keep the promise you made to your servant David my father when you said: ‘There will never fail to be a man of your line before me to sit on the throne of Israel, if only your sons will pay attention to their way by walking before me, just as you have walked before me.’ 26 And now, O God of Israel, let the promise that you made to your servant David my father prove trustworthy, please.27 “But will God really dwell on the earth? Look! The heavens, yes, the heaven of the heavens, cannot contain you; how much less, then, this house that I have built! 28 Now pay attention to the prayer of your servant and to his request for favor, O Jehovah my God, and listen to the cry for help and to the prayer that your servant is praying before you today. 29 May your eyes be open toward this house night and day, toward the place of which you said, ‘My name will be there,’ to listen to the prayer that your servant prays toward this place. 30 And listen to your servant’s request for favor and to the request by your people Israel that they pray toward this place, and may you hear from your dwelling place in the heavens; yes, may you hear and forgive.31 “When a man sins against his fellow man and is made to take an oath and is brought under liability to the oath, and while under the oath he comes before your altar in this house, 32 may you then hear from the heavens and act and judge your servants by pronouncing the wicked one guilty and bringing what he did on his own head, and by pronouncing the righteous one innocent and rewarding him according to his own righteousness.33 “When your people Israel are defeated by an enemy because they kept sinning against you, and they return to you and glorify your name and pray and beg you for favor in this house, 34 may you then hear from the heavens and forgive the sin of your people Israel and bring them back to the land that you gave to their forefathers.35 “When the heavens are shut up and there is no rain because they kept sinning against you, and they pray toward this place and glorify your name and turn back from their sin because you humbled them, 36 may you then hear from the heavens and forgive the sin of your servants, of your people Israel, for you will instruct them about the good way in which they should walk; and bring rain on your land that you gave to your people as an inheritance.37 “If a famine occurs in the land, or a pestilence, a scorching blight, mildew, swarming locusts, or voracious locusts; or if their enemy besieges them in any of the cities of the land or if any other sort of plague or disease occurs, 38 whatever prayer, whatever request for favor may be made by any man or by all your people Israel (for each one knows the plague of his own heart) when they spread out their hands toward this house, 39 then may you hear from the heavens, your dwelling place, and may you forgive and take action; and reward each one according to all his ways, for you know his heart (you alone truly know every human heart), 40 so that they may fear you all the days they live on the land that you gave to our forefathers.41 “Also concerning the foreigner who is not part of your people Israel and who comes from a distant land because of your name 42 (for they will hear about your great name and your mighty hand and your outstretched arm), and he comes and prays toward this house, 43 may you then listen from the heavens, your dwelling place, and do all that the foreigner asks of you, so that all the peoples of the earth may know your name and fear you, as your people Israel do, and may know that your name has been called on this house that I have built.44 “If your people go to war against their enemy in the way that you send them, and they pray to Jehovah in the direction of the city that you have chosen and toward the house that I have built for your name, 45 then hear from the heavens their prayer and their request for favor and execute judgment for them.46 “If they sin against you (for there is no man who does not sin), and you are furious with them and you abandon them to an enemy, and their captors carry them off captive to the land of the enemy, far or near; 47 and they come to their senses in the land where they were carried off captive, and they return to you and beg you for favor in the land of their captors, saying, ‘We have sinned and done wrong; we have acted wickedly,’ 48 and they return to you with all their heart and all their soul in the land of their enemies who carried them off captive, and they pray to you in the direction of their land that you gave to their forefathers and of the city that you have chosen and the house that I have built for your name, 49 then hear from the heavens, your dwelling place, their prayer and their request for favor, and execute judgment for them 50 and forgive your people who have sinned against you, forgiving all their transgressions they committed against you. You will make them objects of pity before their captors, and they will pity them 51 (for they are your people and your inheritance, whom you brought out of Egypt, from inside the iron-smelting furnace). 52 May your eyes be opened to your servant’s request for favor and to the request for favor by your people Israel by listening whenever they call to you. 53 For you set them apart as your inheritance out of all the peoples of the earth, just as you declared through Moses your servant when you were bringing our forefathers out of Egypt, O Sovereign Lord Jehovah.”54 And as soon as Solʹo·mon finished offering to Jehovah this entire prayer and request for favor, he rose up from before the altar of Jehovah, where he had been kneeling with his hands spread out to the heavens. 55 He then stood and blessed all the congregation of Israel with a loud voice, saying: 56 “Praised be Jehovah, who has given a resting-place to his people Israel, just as he promised. Not one word of all his good promise that he made through Moses his servant has failed. 57 May Jehovah our God be with us just as he was with our forefathers. May he not abandon us nor forsake us. 58 May he draw our heart toward himself, to walk in all his ways and to keep his commandments, his regulations, and his judgments, which he commanded our forefathers to observe. 59 And may these words of mine with which I have begged Jehovah for favor be near to Jehovah our God by day and night, that he may execute judgment for his servant and for his people Israel as each day requires, 60 so that all the peoples of the earth may know that Jehovah is the true God. There is no other! 61 So let your heart be complete with Jehovah our God by walking in his regulations and by keeping his commandments as on this day.”62 Now the king and all Israel with him offered a grand sacrifice before Jehovah. 63 Solʹo·mon offered the communion sacrifices to Jehovah: He offered 22,000 cattle and 120,000 sheep. Thus the king and all the Israelites inaugurated the house of Jehovah. 64 On that day the king had to sanctify the middle of the courtyard that is before the house of Jehovah, for there he had to offer up the burnt sacrifices, the grain offerings, and the fat pieces of the communion sacrifices, because the copper altar that is before Jehovah was too small to contain the burnt sacrifices, the grain offerings, and the fat pieces of the communion sacrifices. 65 At that time Solʹo·mon held the festival together with all Israel, a great congregation from Leʹbo-haʹmath down to the Wadi of Egypt, before Jehovah our God for 7 days and then another 7 days, 14 days in all. 66 On the following day, he sent the people away, and they blessed the king and went to their homes rejoicing and feeling glad of heart over all the goodness that Jehovah had shown to David his servant and Israel his people.
9 As soon as Solʹo·mon had finished building the house of Jehovah, the house of the king, and everything Solʹo·mon desired to make, 2 Jehovah appeared to Solʹo·mon a second time, just as he had appeared to him in Gibʹe·on. 3 Jehovah said to him: “I have heard your prayer and your request for favor that you made before me. I have sanctified this house that you built by permanently putting my name there, and my eyes and my heart will always be there. 4 And you, if you walk before me as your father David walked, with integrity of heart and with uprightness, by doing everything I have commanded you, and you obey my regulations and my judgments, 5 then I will establish the throne of your kingdom over Israel forever, just as I promised your father David, saying, ‘There will never fail to be a man of your line sitting on the throne of Israel.’ 6 But if you and your sons turn away from following me and do not keep my commandments and my statutes that I have put before you, and you go and serve other gods and bow down to them, 7 I will cut Israel off from the surface of the land that I have given to them, and the house that I have sanctified for my name I will cast out of my sight, and Israel will become an object of scorn and a cause for ridicule among all the peoples. 8 And this house will become heaps of ruins. Everyone passing by it will stare in amazement and will whistle and say, ‘Why did Jehovah do that to this land and this house?’ 9 Then they will say, ‘It was because they abandoned Jehovah their God, who had brought their forefathers out of the land of Egypt, and they embraced other gods and bowed down to them and served them. That is why Jehovah brought all this calamity on them.’”10 At the end of 20 years, during which Solʹo·mon built the two houses, the house of Jehovah and the house of the king, 11 Hiʹram the king of Tyre had supplied Solʹo·mon with cedar and juniper timbers and with as much gold as he desired, and King Solʹo·mon gave to Hiʹram 20 cities in the land of Galʹi·lee. 12 So Hiʹram went out from Tyre to see the cities that Solʹo·mon had given him, but he was not satisfied with them. 13 He said: “What sort of cities are these that you have given me, my brother?” So they came to be called the Land of Caʹbul down to this day. 14 In the meantime, Hiʹram sent to the king 120 talents of gold.15 This is the account of those whom King Solʹo·mon conscripted for forced labor to build the house of Jehovah, his own house, the Mound, the wall of Jerusalem, Haʹzor, Me·gidʹdo, and Geʹzer. 16 (Pharʹaoh king of Egypt had come up and captured Geʹzer and had burned it with fire, and he had also killed the Caʹnaan·ites dwelling in the city. So he gave it as a parting gift to his daughter, the wife of Solʹo·mon.) 17 Solʹo·mon built up Geʹzer, Lower Beth-hoʹron, 18 Baʹal·ath, and Taʹmar in the wilderness, within the land, 19 as well as all of Solʹo·mon’s storage cities, the chariot cities, the cities for the horsemen, and whatever Solʹo·mon desired to build in Jerusalem, in Lebʹa·non, and in all the land of his dominion. 20 As for all the people who were left from the Amʹor·ites, the Hitʹtites, the Perʹiz·zites, the Hiʹvites, and the Jebʹu·sites, who were not part of the people of Israel, 21 their descendants who were left in the land—those whom the Israelites had been unable to devote to destruction—were conscripted by Solʹo·mon for forced labor as slaves until this day. 22 But Solʹo·mon did not make any of the Israelites slaves, for they were his warriors, servants, princes, adjutants, and the chiefs of his charioteers and horsemen. 23 There were 550 chiefs of the deputies who were over the work of Solʹo·mon, the foremen over the people who were doing the work.24 But Pharʹaoh’s daughter came up from the City of David to her own house that he had built for her; then he built the Mound.25 Three times a year Solʹo·mon offered up burnt sacrifices and communion sacrifices on the altar that he had built for Jehovah, also making sacrificial smoke on the altar, which was before Jehovah, so he completed the house.26 King Solʹo·mon also made a fleet of ships in Eʹzi·on-geʹber, which is by Eʹloth, on the shore of the Red Sea in the land of Eʹdom. 27 Hiʹram sent his own servants with the fleet of ships, experienced seamen, to serve along with the servants of Solʹo·mon. 28 They went to Oʹphir and took from there 420 talents of gold and brought it to King Solʹo·mon.
1 Now King David was old, advanced in years, and although they would cover him with garments, he could not get warm. 2 So his servants said to him: “Let a girl, a virgin, be found for my lord the king, and she will wait on the king as his nurse. She will lie in your arms so that my lord the king may feel warm.” 3 They searched throughout all the territory of Israel for a beautiful girl, and they found Abʹi·shag the Shuʹnam·mite and brought her in to the king. 4 The girl was extremely beautiful, and she became the king’s nurse and waited on him, but the king did not have sexual relations with her.5 Meanwhile, Ad·o·niʹjah the son of Hagʹgith was exalting himself, saying: “I am going to be king!” He had a chariot made for himself with horsemen and 50 men to run before him. 6 But his father had never confronted him by saying: “Why have you done this?” He was also very handsome, and his mother had given birth to him after Abʹsa·lom. 7 He conferred with Joʹab the son of Ze·ruʹiah and A·biʹa·thar the priest, and they offered Ad·o·niʹjah help and support. 8 But Zaʹdok the priest, Be·naiʹah the son of Je·hoiʹa·da, Nathan the prophet, Shimʹe·i, Reʹi, and David’s mighty warriors did not support Ad·o·niʹjah.9 Eventually Ad·o·niʹjah held a sacrifice of sheep, cattle, and fattened animals by the stone of Zoʹhe·leth, which is near En-roʹgel, and he invited all his brothers the king’s sons, and all the men of Judah the king’s servants. 10 But he did not invite Nathan the prophet, Be·naiʹah and the mighty warriors, or Solʹo·mon his brother. 11 Nathan then said to Bath-sheʹba, Solʹo·mon’s mother: “Have you not heard that Ad·o·niʹjah the son of Hagʹgith has become king, and our lord David does not know anything about it? 12 So now come, please, and let me advise you, so that you may save your own life and the life of your son Solʹo·mon. 13 Go in to King David and say to him, ‘Was it not you, my lord the king, who swore to your servant, saying: “Your son Solʹo·mon will become king after me, and he is the one who will sit on my throne”? So why has Ad·o·niʹjah become king?’ 14 While you are still there speaking with the king, I will come in after you and confirm your words.”15 So Bath-sheʹba went in to the king, into his private room. The king was very old, and Abʹi·shag the Shuʹnam·mite was waiting on the king. 16 Then Bath-sheʹba bowed low and prostrated herself to the king, and the king said: “What is your request?” 17 She replied: “My lord, it was you who swore by Jehovah your God to your servant, ‘Your son Solʹo·mon will become king after me, and he is the one who will sit on my throne.’ 18 But look! Ad·o·niʹjah has become king, and my lord the king does not know anything about it. 19 He sacrificed bulls, fattened animals, and sheep in great quantity and invited all the sons of the king and A·biʹa·thar the priest and Joʹab the chief of the army; but he did not invite your servant Solʹo·mon. 20 And now, my lord the king, the eyes of all Israel are upon you to tell them who will sit on the throne of my lord the king after him. 21 Otherwise, as soon as my lord the king is laid to rest with his forefathers, I and also my son Solʹo·mon will be considered traitors.”22 And while she was still speaking to the king, Nathan the prophet came in. 23 At once the king was told: “Here is Nathan the prophet!” He came in before the king and prostrated himself to the king with his face to the ground. 24 Then Nathan said: “My lord the king, did you say, ‘Ad·o·niʹjah will become king after me, and he is the one who will sit on my throne’? 25 For today he has gone down to sacrifice bulls, fattened animals, and sheep in great quantity, and he has invited all the sons of the king and the chiefs of the army and A·biʹa·thar the priest. They are there eating and drinking with him, and they keep saying, ‘Long live King Ad·o·niʹjah!’ 26 But he did not invite me, your servant, or Zaʹdok the priest, or Be·naiʹah the son of Je·hoiʹa·da, or your servant Solʹo·mon. 27 Has my lord the king authorized this without telling your servant who should sit on the throne of my lord the king after him?”28 King David now answered: “Call Bath-sheʹba for me.” At that she came in and stood before the king. 29 The king then swore an oath: “As surely as Jehovah is living, the one who rescued me out of all distress, 30 just as I swore to you by Jehovah the God of Israel, saying, ‘Your son Solʹo·mon will become king after me, and he is the one who will sit on my throne in my place!’ that is what I will bring about this day.” 31 Then Bath-sheʹba bowed low with her face to the ground and prostrated herself to the king and said: “May my lord King David live forever!”32 Immediately King David said: “Call for me Zaʹdok the priest, Nathan the prophet, and Be·naiʹah the son of Je·hoiʹa·da.” So they came in before the king. 33 The king said to them: “Take with you the servants of your lord, and have my son Solʹo·mon ride on my own mule, and lead him down to Giʹhon. 34 Zaʹdok the priest and Nathan the prophet will anoint him there as king over Israel; then blow the horn and say, ‘Long live King Solʹo·mon!’ 35 Then follow him back, and he will come in and sit on my throne; and he will be king in my place, and I will commission him as leader over Israel and over Judah.” 36 At once Be·naiʹah the son of Je·hoiʹa·da said to the king: “Amen! May Jehovah the God of my lord the king confirm it. 37 Just as Jehovah was with my lord the king, so let him be with Solʹo·mon, and may He make his throne greater than the throne of my lord King David.”38 Then Zaʹdok the priest, Nathan the prophet, Be·naiʹah the son of Je·hoiʹa·da, and the Cherʹe·thites and the Pelʹe·thites went down and had Solʹo·mon ride on the mule of King David, and they brought him to Giʹhon. 39 Zaʹdok the priest now took the horn of oil out of the tent and anointed Solʹo·mon, and they began to blow the horn, and all the people began shouting: “Long live King Solʹo·mon!” 40 After that all the people followed him and went up, playing flutes and rejoicing greatly, so that the earth was split open by their noise.41 Ad·o·niʹjah and all those invited by him heard it when they had finished eating. As soon as Joʹab heard the sound of the horn, he said: “Why is there such a noisy uproar in the city?” 42 While he was still speaking, Jonʹa·than the son of A·biʹa·thar the priest came. Then Ad·o·niʹjah said: “Come in, for you are a good man, and you must bring good news.” 43 But Jonʹa·than answered Ad·o·niʹjah: “No! Our lord King David has made Solʹo·mon king. 44 The king sent with him Zaʹdok the priest, Nathan the prophet, Be·naiʹah the son of Je·hoiʹa·da, and the Cherʹe·thites and the Pelʹe·thites, and they had him ride on the mule of the king. 45 Then Zaʹdok the priest and Nathan the prophet anointed him as king in Giʹhon. After that they came up from there rejoicing, and the city is in an uproar. That was the noise that you heard. 46 Moreover, Solʹo·mon has sat down on the royal throne. 47 Another thing, the servants of the king have come in to congratulate our lord King David, saying, ‘May your God make Solʹo·mon’s name more splendid than your name, and may He make his throne greater than your throne!’ At that the king bowed down on the bed. 48 And the king also said, ‘May Jehovah the God of Israel be praised, who today has granted someone to sit on my throne and has allowed my own eyes to see it!’”49 And all those invited by Ad·o·niʹjah became terrified, and each of them rose up and went his own way. 50 Ad·o·niʹjah was also afraid because of Solʹo·mon, so he got up and went and grabbed hold of the horns of the altar. 51 The report was made to Solʹo·mon: “Here Ad·o·niʹjah has become afraid of King Solʹo·mon; and he has taken hold of the horns of the altar, saying, ‘Let King Solʹo·mon first swear to me that he will not put his servant to death by the sword.’” 52 To this Solʹo·mon said: “If he behaves in a worthy manner, not a single hair of his will fall to the ground; but if what is bad is found in him, he will have to die.” 53 So King Solʹo·mon sent for him to be brought down from the altar. Then he came in and bowed down to King Solʹo·mon, after which Solʹo·mon said to him: “Go to your own house.”
10 Now Aʹhab had 70 sons in Sa·marʹi·a. So Jeʹhu wrote letters and sent them to Sa·marʹi·a, to the princes of Jezʹre·el, the elders, and the guardians of Aʹhab’s children, saying: 2 “Now when this letter comes to you, the sons of your lord will be with you, as well as the war chariots, the horses, a fortified city, and weapons. 3 Select the best and most suitable of the sons of your lord and put him on the throne of his father. Then fight for the house of your lord.”4 But they were overcome with fear and said: “Look! If two kings could not stand before him, how can we stand?” 5 So the overseer of the palace, the governor of the city, the elders, and the guardians sent this message to Jeʹhu: “We are your servants, and we will do everything that you tell us. We will not make anyone king. Do whatever seems good in your eyes.”6 Then he wrote them a second letter, saying: “If you belong to me and are willing to obey me, bring the heads of the sons of your lord and come to me tomorrow at this time at Jezʹre·el.”Now the 70 sons of the king were with the distinguished men of the city who were raising them. 7 As soon as the letter came to them, they took the sons of the king and slaughtered them, 70 men, and they put their heads in baskets and sent them to him at Jezʹre·el. 8 The messenger came in and told him: “They have brought the heads of the sons of the king.” So he said: “Put them in two heaps at the entrance of the city gate until morning.” 9 When he went out in the morning, he stood before all the people and said: “You are innocent. Yes, I conspired against my lord, and I killed him, but who struck down all of these? 10 Know, then, that not a single word of Jehovah’s that Jehovah has spoken against the house of Aʹhab will go unfulfilled, and Jehovah has done what he spoke through his servant E·liʹjah.” 11 Moreover, Jeʹhu struck down all who were left of the house of Aʹhab in Jezʹre·el, as well as all his distinguished men, his acquaintances, and his priests, until he had left him no survivor.12 Then he got up and went on his way to Sa·marʹi·a. The binding house of the shepherds was on the way. 13 There Jeʹhu encountered the brothers of King A·ha·ziʹah of Judah, and he said to them, “Who are you?” They said: “We are the brothers of A·ha·ziʹah, and we are on our way down to ask if all is well with the sons of the king and the sons of the queen mother.” 14 Immediately he said: “Capture them alive!” So they captured them alive and slaughtered them at the cistern of the binding house, 42 men. He did not let a single one of them survive.15 As he went from there, he encountered Je·honʹa·dab the son of Reʹchab, who was coming to meet him. When he greeted him, he said to him: “Is your heart fully with me, just as my heart is with your heart?”Je·honʹa·dab replied: “It is.”“If so, give me your hand.”So he gave him his hand, and Jeʹhu pulled him up into the chariot with him. 16 Then he said: “Come along with me, and see my toleration of no rivalry toward Jehovah.” So they had him ride with him in his war chariot. 17 Then he came to Sa·marʹi·a, and he struck down all who were left over of Aʹhab’s house in Sa·marʹi·a until he had annihilated them, according to Jehovah’s word that he had spoken to E·liʹjah.18 Further, Jeʹhu collected all the people together and said to them: “Aʹhab worshipped Baʹal a little, but Jeʹhu will worship him much more. 19 So summon all the prophets of Baʹal, all his worshippers, and all his priests to me. Do not let a single one be absent, because I have a great sacrifice for Baʹal. Anyone who is absent will not live.” But Jeʹhu was acting with cunning to destroy the worshippers of Baʹal.20 Jeʹhu continued: “Declare a solemn assembly for Baʹal.” So they proclaimed it. 21 After that Jeʹhu sent word throughout Israel, and all the worshippers of Baʹal came. Not a single one was left out who did not come. They entered the house of Baʹal, and the house of Baʹal was filled from end to end. 22 He said to the one who was in charge of the wardrobe: “Bring out garments for all the worshippers of Baʹal.” So he brought out the clothing for them. 23 Then Jeʹhu and Je·honʹa·dab the son of Reʹchab went into the house of Baʹal. He now said to the worshippers of Baʹal: “Search carefully and see that there are no worshippers of Jehovah here, only worshippers of Baʹal.” 24 Finally they came in to offer up sacrifices and burnt offerings. Jeʹhu had stationed 80 of his men outside and said: “If any one of the men I am putting into your hands escapes, it will be your life for his.”25 As soon as he finished offering up the burnt offering, Jeʹhu said to the guards and the adjutants: “Come in and strike them down! Do not let a single one escape!” So the guards and the adjutants struck them down with the sword and threw them out, and they kept going as far as the inner sanctuary of the house of Baʹal. 26 Then they brought out the sacred pillars of the house of Baʹal and burned each one. 27 They tore down the sacred pillar of Baʹal, and they tore down the house of Baʹal and turned it into latrines, as it remains to this day.28 Thus Jeʹhu annihilated Baʹal out of Israel. 29 However, Jeʹhu did not turn away from the sins that Jer·o·boʹam the son of Neʹbat had caused Israel to commit as regards the golden calves that were in Bethʹel and in Dan. 30 So Jehovah said to Jeʹhu: “Because you have acted well and have done what is right in my eyes by carrying out all that was in my heart to do to the house of Aʹhab, four generations of your sons will sit on the throne of Israel.” 31 But Jeʹhu did not take care to walk in the Law of Jehovah the God of Israel with all his heart. He did not turn away from the sins that Jer·o·boʹam had caused Israel to commit.32 In those days Jehovah started to cut off Israel piece by piece. Hazʹa·el kept attacking them throughout the territory of Israel, 33 from the Jordan eastward, all the land of Gilʹe·ad—of the Gadʹites, the Reuʹben·ites, and the Ma·nasʹsites—from A·roʹer, which is by the Arʹnon Valley, to Gilʹe·ad and Baʹshan.34 And the rest of the history of Jeʹhu, all that he did and all his mightiness, is it not written in the book of the history of the times of the kings of Israel? 35 Then Jeʹhu was laid to rest with his forefathers, and they buried him in Sa·marʹi·a; and his son Je·hoʹa·haz became king in his place. 36 The length of Jeʹhu’s reign over Israel was 28 years in Sa·marʹi·a.
11 Now when Ath·a·liʹah, A·ha·ziʹah’s mother, saw that her son had died, she rose up and destroyed the entire royal line. 2 However, Je·hoshʹe·ba the daughter of King Je·hoʹram, A·ha·ziʹah’s sister, took Je·hoʹash the son of A·ha·ziʹah and stole him away from among the sons of the king who were to be put to death, keeping him and his nurse in an inner bedroom. They managed to keep him concealed from Ath·a·liʹah, so he was not put to death. 3 He remained with her for six years, hidden at the house of Jehovah, while Ath·a·liʹah was ruling over the land.4 In the seventh year, Je·hoiʹa·da sent for the chiefs of hundreds of the Caʹri·an bodyguard and of the palace guards and had them come to him at the house of Jehovah. He made a pact with them and had them swear to it at the house of Jehovah, and then he showed them the son of the king. 5 He ordered them: “This is what you are to do: One third of you will be on duty on the Sabbath and will keep strict watch over the king’s house, 6 another third will be at the Gate of the Foundation, and another third will be at the gate behind the palace guards. You will take turns watching over the house. 7 Your two divisions that are supposed to be off duty on the Sabbath must keep strict watch over the house of Jehovah to protect the king. 8 You must surround the king on every side, each with his weapons in hand. Anyone entering within the ranks will be put to death. Stay with the king wherever he goes.”9 The chiefs of hundreds did exactly what Je·hoiʹa·da the priest had commanded. So each one took his men who were on duty on the Sabbath, together with those who were off duty on the Sabbath, and they came in to Je·hoiʹa·da the priest. 10 The priest then gave the chiefs of hundreds the spears and the circular shields that had belonged to King David, which were in the house of Jehovah. 11 And the palace guards took their positions, each with his weapons in hand, from the right side of the house to the left side of the house, by the altar and by the house, all around the king. 12 Then Je·hoiʹa·da brought the king’s son out and put on him the crown and the Testimony, and they made him king and anointed him. They began to clap their hands and say: “Long live the king!”13 When Ath·a·liʹah heard the sound of the people running, she immediately came to the people at the house of Jehovah. 14 Then she saw the king standing there by the pillar according to the custom. The chiefs and the trumpeters were with the king, and all the people of the land were rejoicing and blowing the trumpets. At this Ath·a·liʹah ripped her garments apart and cried out: “Conspiracy! Conspiracy!” 15 But Je·hoiʹa·da the priest commanded the chiefs of hundreds, those appointed over the army, and said to them: “Take her out from among the ranks, and if anyone follows her, put him to death with the sword!” For the priest had said: “Do not put her to death in the house of Jehovah.” 16 So they seized her, and when she reached the place where the horses enter the king’s house, she was put to death there.17 Then Je·hoiʹa·da made a covenant between Jehovah and the king and the people, that they would continue as the people of Jehovah, and he also made a covenant between the king and the people. 18 After that all the people of the land came to the house of Baʹal and tore down his altars, completely smashed his images, and killed Matʹtan the priest of Baʹal in front of the altars.Then the priest appointed overseers over the house of Jehovah. 19 Further, he took the chiefs of hundreds, the Caʹri·an bodyguard, the palace guards, and all the people of the land to escort the king down from the house of Jehovah, and they came to the king’s house by the way of the gate of the palace guard. He then sat on the throne of the kings. 20 So all the people of the land rejoiced and the city was quiet, for they had put Ath·a·liʹah to death with the sword at the king’s house.21 Je·hoʹash was seven years old when he became king.
12 In the seventh year of Jeʹhu, Je·hoʹash became king, and he reigned for 40 years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Zibʹi·ah from Beʹer-sheʹba. 2 Je·hoʹash continued doing what was right in Jehovah’s eyes all the days that Je·hoiʹa·da the priest instructed him. 3 However, the high places were not removed, and the people were still sacrificing and making sacrificial smoke on the high places.4 Je·hoʹash said to the priests: “Take all the money that is brought to the house of Jehovah for the holy offerings, the money for which each one is assessed, the money given as an estimated value for a person, and all the money that each person’s heart is moved to bring to the house of Jehovah. 5 The priests will personally take it from their donors and use it to repair the house, wherever any damage is found.”6 By the 23rd year of King Je·hoʹash, the priests had not yet repaired the damage to the house. 7 So King Je·hoʹash called Je·hoiʹa·da the priest and the other priests and said to them: “Why are you not repairing the damage to the house? Therefore, do not take any more money from your donors unless it is used to repair the house.” 8 At that the priests agreed not to take any more money from the people and not to be responsible for repairing the house.9 Je·hoiʹa·da the priest then took a chest and bored a hole in its lid and put it next to the altar on the right as one enters the house of Jehovah. That is where the priests who served as doorkeepers would put all the money that was brought into the house of Jehovah. 10 Whenever they saw that there was a great deal of money in the chest, the secretary of the king and the high priest would come up and collect and count the money that had been brought to the house of Jehovah. 11 They would give the money that had been counted to those appointed over the work being done in the house of Jehovah. They, in turn, paid it to the woodworkers and to the builders who were working at the house of Jehovah, 12 as well as to the masons and the stonecutters. They also bought timbers and hewn stones for repairing the damage to the house of Jehovah and used the money for all the other expenses incurred in repairing the house.13 However, none of the money brought to the house of Jehovah was used to make basins of silver, extinguishers, bowls, trumpets, or any sort of gold or silver article for the house of Jehovah. 14 They would give it only to those who did the work, and with it they repaired the house of Jehovah. 15 They would not call for an accounting from the men to whom they gave the money to give to the workers, for they were trustworthy. 16 However, the money for guilt offerings and the money for sin offerings was not brought to the house of Jehovah; it belonged to the priests.17 It was then that Hazʹa·el the king of Syria went up to fight against Gath, and he captured it, after which he decided to attack Jerusalem. 18 At that King Je·hoʹash of Judah took all the holy offerings that his forefathers Je·hoshʹa·phat, Je·hoʹram, and A·ha·ziʹah, the kings of Judah, had sanctified, as well as his own holy offerings and all the gold to be found in the treasuries of the house of Jehovah and the king’s house, and sent them to Hazʹa·el the king of Syria. So he withdrew from Jerusalem.19 As for the rest of the history of Je·hoʹash, all that he did, is it not written in the book of the history of the times of the kings of Judah? 20 However, his servants joined in a conspiracy against him and struck Je·hoʹash down at the house of the Mound, on the way that goes down to Silʹla. 21 His servants Joʹza·car the son of Shimʹe·ath and Je·hozʹa·bad the son of Shoʹmer were the ones who struck him and put him to death. They buried him with his forefathers in the City of David, and his son Am·a·ziʹah became king in his place.
13 In the 23rd year of Je·hoʹash the son of A·ha·ziʹah the king of Judah, Je·hoʹa·haz the son of Jeʹhu became king over Israel in Sa·marʹi·a, and he reigned for 17 years. 2 He continued to do what was bad in Jehovah’s eyes, and he persisted in the sin that Jer·o·boʹam the son of Neʹbat had caused Israel to commit. He did not turn away from it. 3 So Jehovah’s anger grew hot against Israel, and he gave them into the hand of King Hazʹa·el of Syria and into the hand of Ben-haʹdad the son of Hazʹa·el all their days.4 In time Je·hoʹa·haz begged for the favor of Jehovah, and Jehovah listened to him, for he had seen the oppression the king of Syria had inflicted on Israel. 5 So Jehovah provided Israel with a savior to free them from Syria’s grip, and the Israelites were able to dwell in their homes as before. 6 (However, they did not depart from the sin of the house of Jer·o·boʹam that he had caused Israel to commit. They continued in this sin, and the sacred pole continued to stand in Sa·marʹi·a.) 7 Je·hoʹa·haz was left with an army of only 50 horsemen, 10 chariots, and 10,000 foot soldiers, because the king of Syria had destroyed them, trampling them like the dust at threshing time.8 As for the rest of the history of Je·hoʹa·haz, all that he did and his mightiness, is it not written in the book of the history of the times of the kings of Israel? 9 Then Je·hoʹa·haz was laid to rest with his forefathers, and they buried him in Sa·marʹi·a; and his son Je·hoʹash became king in his place.10 In the 37th year of King Je·hoʹash of Judah, Je·hoʹash the son of Je·hoʹa·haz became king over Israel in Sa·marʹi·a, and he reigned for 16 years. 11 He continued to do what was bad in Jehovah’s eyes, not departing from all the sins that Jer·o·boʹam the son of Neʹbat had made Israel commit. He continued in these sins.12 As for the rest of the history of Je·hoʹash, all that he did and his mightiness and how he fought against King Am·a·ziʹah of Judah, is it not written in the book of the history of the times of the kings of Israel? 13 Then Je·hoʹash was laid to rest with his forefathers, and Jer·o·boʹam sat on his throne. And Je·hoʹash was buried in Sa·marʹi·a with the kings of Israel.14 Now when E·liʹsha became ill with the sickness from which he eventually died, Je·hoʹash the king of Israel came down to him and wept over him, saying: “My father, my father! The chariot of Israel and his horsemen!” 15 E·liʹsha then said to him: “Take a bow and arrows.” So he took a bow and arrows. 16 Then he said to the king of Israel: “Put your hand to the bow.” So he put his hand to it, after which E·liʹsha laid his hands on the king’s hands. 17 Then he said: “Open the window toward the east.” So he opened it. E·liʹsha said: “Shoot!” So he shot. He now said: “Jehovah’s arrow of victory, the arrow of victory over Syria! You will strike down Syria at Aʹphek until you finish it off.”18 He continued: “Take the arrows,” and he took them. Then he said to the king of Israel: “Strike the ground.” So he struck the ground three times and stopped. 19 At that the man of the true God grew indignant at him and said: “You should have struck the ground five or six times! Then you would have struck down Syria until you finished it off, but now you will strike down Syria only three times.”20 After that E·liʹsha died and was buried. There were Moʹab·ite marauder bands that would come into the land at the beginning of the year. 21 As some men were burying a man, they saw the marauder band, so they quickly threw the man into E·liʹsha’s burial place and ran off. When the man touched the bones of E·liʹsha, he came to life and stood on his feet.22 Now King Hazʹa·el of Syria oppressed Israel all the days of Je·hoʹa·haz. 23 However, Jehovah extended favor and mercy to them and showed his concern for them for the sake of his covenant with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. He did not want to bring them to ruin, and he has not cast them away from his presence to this day. 24 When King Hazʹa·el of Syria died, his son Ben-haʹdad became king in his place. 25 Je·hoʹash the son of Je·hoʹa·haz then took back from Ben-haʹdad the son of Hazʹa·el the cities that he had taken in war from Je·hoʹa·haz his father. Three times Je·hoʹash struck him down, and he recovered the cities of Israel.
14 In the second year of Je·hoʹash the son of Je·hoʹa·haz the king of Israel, Am·a·ziʹah the son of King Je·hoʹash of Judah became king. 2 He was 25 years old when he became king, and he reigned for 29 years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Je·ho·adʹdin of Jerusalem. 3 He continued to do what was right in Jehovah’s eyes, but not like David his forefather. He did everything as Je·hoʹash his father had done. 4 However, the high places were not removed, and the people were still sacrificing and making sacrificial smoke on the high places. 5 As soon as he had the kingdom firmly in his control, he struck down his servants who had struck down his father the king. 6 But he did not put the sons of the murderers to death, in harmony with Jehovah’s commandment written in the book of Moses’ Law: “Fathers should not be put to death for their sons, and sons should not be put to death for their fathers; but each one should be put to death for his own sin.” 7 He struck down the Eʹdom·ites in the Valley of Salt, 10,000 men, and captured Seʹla in the war, and its name became Jokʹthe·el to this day.8 Then Am·a·ziʹah sent messengers to Je·hoʹash son of Je·hoʹa·haz son of Jeʹhu the king of Israel, saying: “Come, let us confront each other in battle.” 9 King Je·hoʹash of Israel sent this message to King Am·a·ziʹah of Judah: “The thorny weed in Lebʹa·non sent a message to the cedar in Lebʹa·non, ‘Give your daughter to my son as a wife.’ However, a wild beast of Lebʹa·non passed by and trampled down the thorny weed. 10 True, you have struck down Eʹdom, so your heart has become arrogant. Enjoy your glory, but stay in your own house. Why should you provoke disaster and fall, bringing Judah down with you?” 11 But Am·a·ziʹah did not listen.So King Je·hoʹash of Israel went up, and he and King Am·a·ziʹah of Judah confronted each other in battle at Beth-sheʹmesh, which belongs to Judah. 12 Judah was defeated by Israel, so each one fled to his home. 13 King Je·hoʹash of Israel captured King Am·a·ziʹah of Judah, son of Je·hoʹash son of A·ha·ziʹah, at Beth-sheʹmesh. Then they came to Jerusalem, and he made a breach in the wall of Jerusalem from the Gate of Eʹphra·im to the Corner Gate, 400 cubits. 14 He took all the gold and the silver and all the articles that were found in the house of Jehovah and in the treasuries of the house of the king, as well as hostages. Then he returned to Sa·marʹi·a.15 As for the rest of the history of Je·hoʹash, what he did and his mightiness and how he fought against King Am·a·ziʹah of Judah, is it not written in the book of the history of the times of the kings of Israel? 16 Then Je·hoʹash was laid to rest with his forefathers and was buried in Sa·marʹi·a with the kings of Israel; and his son Jer·o·boʹam became king in his place.17 Am·a·ziʹah the son of Je·hoʹash the king of Judah lived for 15 years after the death of Je·hoʹash the son of Je·hoʹa·haz the king of Israel. 18 As for the rest of the history of Am·a·ziʹah, is it not written in the book of the history of the times of the kings of Judah? 19 Later a conspiracy was formed against him at Jerusalem, and he fled to Laʹchish, but they sent men after him to Laʹchish and put him to death there. 20 So they carried him back on horses, and he was buried in Jerusalem with his forefathers in the City of David. 21 Then all the people of Judah took Az·a·riʹah, who was 16 years old, and made him king in place of his father Am·a·ziʹah. 22 He rebuilt Eʹlath and restored it to Judah after the king was laid to rest with his forefathers.23 In the 15th year of Am·a·ziʹah the son of Je·hoʹash the king of Judah, Jer·o·boʹam the son of King Je·hoʹash of Israel became king in Sa·marʹi·a, and he reigned for 41 years. 24 He continued to do what was bad in Jehovah’s eyes. He did not depart from all the sins that Jer·o·boʹam the son of Neʹbat had caused Israel to commit. 25 He restored the boundary of Israel from Leʹbo-haʹmath clear to the Sea of the Arʹa·bah, according to the word that Jehovah the God of Israel spoke through his servant Joʹnah the son of A·mitʹtai, the prophet from Gath-heʹpher. 26 For Jehovah had seen the very bitter affliction of Israel. There was no one left to help Israel, not even the helpless or the weak. 27 But Jehovah had promised not to wipe out the name of Israel from under the heavens. So he saved them by the hand of Jer·o·boʹam the son of Je·hoʹash.28 As for the rest of the history of Jer·o·boʹam, all that he did and his mightiness, how he fought and how he restored Damascus and Haʹmath to Judah in Israel, is it not written in the book of the history of the times of the kings of Israel? 29 Then Jer·o·boʹam was laid to rest with his forefathers, with the kings of Israel; and his son Zech·a·riʹah became king in his place.
15 In the 27th year of King Jer·o·boʹam of Israel, Az·a·riʹah the son of King Am·a·ziʹah of Judah became king. 2 He was 16 years old when he became king, and he reigned for 52 years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Je·co·liʹah of Jerusalem. 3 He continued to do what was right in Jehovah’s eyes, just as his father Am·a·ziʹah had done. 4 However, the high places were not removed, and the people were still sacrificing and making sacrificial smoke on the high places. 5 Jehovah afflicted the king, and he remained a leper until the day of his death; and he stayed in a separate house, while the king’s son Joʹtham was in charge of the house, judging the people of the land. 6 As for the rest of the history of Az·a·riʹah, all that he did, is it not written in the book of the history of the times of the kings of Judah? 7 Then Az·a·riʹah was laid to rest with his forefathers, and they buried him with his forefathers in the City of David; and his son Joʹtham became king in his place.8 In the 38th year of King Az·a·riʹah of Judah, Zech·a·riʹah the son of Jer·o·boʹam became king over Israel in Sa·marʹi·a, and he reigned for six months. 9 He did what was bad in Jehovah’s eyes, just as his forefathers had done. He did not depart from the sins that Jer·o·boʹam the son of Neʹbat had caused Israel to commit. 10 Then Shalʹlum the son of Jaʹbesh conspired against him and struck him down at Ibʹle·am. After putting him to death, he became king in his place. 11 As for the rest of the history of Zech·a·riʹah, it is written in the book of the history of the times of the kings of Israel. 12 That fulfilled Jehovah’s word spoken to Jeʹhu: “Four generations of your sons will sit on the throne of Israel.” And that is how it happened.13 Shalʹlum the son of Jaʹbesh became king in the 39th year of King Uz·ziʹah of Judah, and he reigned for a full month in Sa·marʹi·a. 14 Then Menʹa·hem the son of Gaʹdi came up from Tirʹzah to Sa·marʹi·a and struck down Shalʹlum the son of Jaʹbesh in Sa·marʹi·a. After putting him to death, he became king in his place. 15 As for the rest of the history of Shalʹlum and the conspiracy that he formed, it is written in the book of the history of the times of the kings of Israel. 16 It was then that Menʹa·hem came from Tirʹzah and struck down Tiphʹsah and all who were in it and its territory, because it did not open its gates to him. He struck it down and ripped open its pregnant women.17 In the 39th year of King Az·a·riʹah of Judah, Menʹa·hem the son of Gaʹdi became king over Israel, and he reigned for ten years in Sa·marʹi·a. 18 He continued to do what was bad in Jehovah’s eyes. He did not depart from all the sins that Jer·o·boʹam the son of Neʹbat had caused Israel to commit, all his days. 19 King Pul of As·syrʹi·a came into the land, and Menʹa·hem gave Pul 1,000 talents of silver in return for his support in strengthening his hold on the kingdom. 20 So Menʹa·hem raised the silver from Israel by exacting it from the prominent, wealthy men. He gave the king of As·syrʹi·a 50 silver shekels for each man. Then the king of As·syrʹi·a turned back and did not stay in the land. 21 As for the rest of the history of Menʹa·hem, all that he did, is it not written in the book of the history of the times of the kings of Israel? 22 Then Menʹa·hem was laid to rest with his forefathers; and his son Pek·a·hiʹah became king in his place.23 In the 50th year of King Az·a·riʹah of Judah, Pek·a·hiʹah the son of Menʹa·hem became king over Israel in Sa·marʹi·a, and he reigned for two years. 24 He continued to do what was bad in Jehovah’s eyes. He did not depart from the sins that Jer·o·boʹam the son of Neʹbat had caused Israel to commit. 25 Then his adjutant Peʹkah the son of Rem·a·liʹah conspired against him and struck him down in Sa·marʹi·a in the fortified tower of the king’s house with Arʹgob and A·riʹeh. He had 50 men of Gilʹe·ad with him; and after he put him to death, he became king in his place. 26 As for the rest of the history of Pek·a·hiʹah, all that he did, it is written in the book of the history of the times of the kings of Israel.27 In the 52nd year of King Az·a·riʹah of Judah, Peʹkah the son of Rem·a·liʹah became king over Israel in Sa·marʹi·a, and he reigned for 20 years. 28 He continued to do what was bad in Jehovah’s eyes, and he did not depart from the sins that Jer·o·boʹam the son of Neʹbat had caused Israel to commit. 29 In the days of King Peʹkah of Israel, King Tigʹlath-pil·eʹser of As·syrʹi·a invaded and captured Iʹjon, Aʹbel-beth-maʹa·cah, Ja·noʹah, Keʹdesh, Haʹzor, Gilʹe·ad, and Galʹi·lee, all the land of Naphʹta·li, and he took the inhabitants into exile in As·syrʹi·a. 30 Then Ho·sheʹa the son of Eʹlah formed a conspiracy against Peʹkah the son of Rem·a·liʹah, and he struck him and put him to death; and he became king in his place in the 20th year of Joʹtham the son of Uz·ziʹah. 31 As for the rest of the history of Peʹkah, all that he did, it is written in the book of the history of the times of the kings of Israel.32 In the second year of Peʹkah the son of Rem·a·liʹah the king of Israel, Joʹtham the son of King Uz·ziʹah of Judah became king. 33 He was 25 years old when he became king, and he reigned for 16 years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Je·ruʹsha the daughter of Zaʹdok. 34 He kept doing what was right in Jehovah’s eyes, just as his father Uz·ziʹah had done. 35 However, the high places were not removed, and the people were still sacrificing and making sacrificial smoke on the high places. He was the one who built the upper gate of the house of Jehovah. 36 As for the rest of the history of Joʹtham, what he did, is it not written in the book of the history of the times of the kings of Judah? 37 In those days Jehovah began sending Reʹzin the king of Syria and Peʹkah the son of Rem·a·liʹah against Judah. 38 Then Joʹtham was laid to rest with his forefathers and was buried with his forefathers in the City of David his forefather. And his son Aʹhaz became king in his place.
16 In the 17th year of Peʹkah the son of Rem·a·liʹah, Aʹhaz the son of King Joʹtham of Judah became king. 2 Aʹhaz was 20 years old when he became king, and he reigned for 16 years in Jerusalem. He did not do what was right in the eyes of Jehovah his God as David his forefather had done. 3 Instead, he walked in the way of the kings of Israel, and he even made his own son pass through the fire, following the detestable practices of the nations that Jehovah had driven out from before the Israelites. 4 He also kept sacrificing and making sacrificial smoke on the high places, on the hills, and under every luxuriant tree.5 It was then that King Reʹzin of Syria and Peʹkah son of Rem·a·liʹah the king of Israel came up to wage war against Jerusalem. They laid siege against Aʹhaz but were not able to capture the city. 6 At that time King Reʹzin of Syria restored Eʹlath to Eʹdom, after which he drove the Jews out of Eʹlath. And the Eʹdom·ites entered Eʹlath, and they have occupied it down to this day. 7 So Aʹhaz sent messengers to King Tigʹlath-pil·eʹser of As·syrʹi·a, saying: “I am your servant and your son. Come up and save me from the hand of the king of Syria and the hand of the king of Israel, who are attacking me.” 8 Aʹhaz then took the silver and the gold that was to be found at the house of Jehovah and in the treasuries of the king’s house and sent the king of As·syrʹi·a a bribe. 9 The king of As·syrʹi·a responded to his request, and he went up to Damascus and captured it and led its people into exile to Kir, and he put Reʹzin to death.10 Then King Aʹhaz went to meet King Tigʹlath-pil·eʹser of As·syrʹi·a at Damascus. When he saw the altar that was in Damascus, King Aʹhaz sent U·riʹjah the priest a plan of the altar, showing its pattern and how it was made. 11 U·riʹjah the priest built an altar according to all the directions that King Aʹhaz had sent from Damascus. U·riʹjah the priest finished building it before King Aʹhaz returned from Damascus. 12 When the king returned from Damascus and saw the altar, he approached the altar and made offerings on it. 13 And on that altar he continued to make his burnt offerings and his grain offerings smoke; he also poured out his drink offerings and sprinkled the blood of his communion sacrifices on it. 14 Then he moved the copper altar that was before Jehovah from its place in front of the house, from between his own altar and the house of Jehovah, and he put it at the north side of his own altar. 15 King Aʹhaz commanded U·riʹjah the priest: “Make the morning burnt offering smoke on the great altar, also the evening grain offering, the king’s burnt offering, and his grain offering, as well as the burnt offerings, the grain offerings, and the drink offerings of all the people. You should also sprinkle on it all the blood of the burnt offerings and all the blood of the other sacrifices. As for the copper altar, let me decide what to do with it.” 16 And U·riʹjah the priest did everything that King Aʹhaz had commanded.17 Furthermore, King Aʹhaz cut the side panels of the carriages into pieces and removed the basins from them, and he took the Sea down off the copper bulls that supported it and put it on a stone pavement. 18 And the covered structure for the Sabbath that had been built in the house and the king’s outer entryway he shifted away from the house of Jehovah; he did so because of the king of As·syrʹi·a.19 As for the rest of the history of Aʹhaz, what he did, is it not written in the book of the history of the times of the kings of Judah? 20 Then Aʹhaz was laid to rest with his forefathers and was buried with his forefathers in the City of David; and his son Hez·e·kiʹah became king in his place.
17 In the 12th year of King Aʹhaz of Judah, Ho·sheʹa the son of Eʹlah became king over Israel in Sa·marʹi·a; he ruled for nine years. 2 He continued to do what was bad in Jehovah’s eyes, only not to the extent of the kings of Israel prior to him. 3 King Shal·man·eʹser of As·syrʹi·a came up against him, and Ho·sheʹa became his servant and began to pay tribute to him. 4 However, the king of As·syrʹi·a learned that Ho·sheʹa was involved in a conspiracy, for he had sent messengers to King So of Egypt and did not bring the tribute up to the king of As·syrʹi·a as in former years. Therefore, the king of As·syrʹi·a kept him confined and bound in prison.5 The king of As·syrʹi·a invaded the entire land, and he came to Sa·marʹi·a and laid siege to it for three years. 6 In the ninth year of Ho·sheʹa, the king of As·syrʹi·a captured Sa·marʹi·a. He then led the people of Israel into exile in As·syrʹi·a and made them dwell in Haʹlah and in Haʹbor at the river Goʹzan and in the cities of the Medes.7 This happened because the people of Israel had sinned against Jehovah their God, who brought them up out of the land of Egypt from under the control of Pharʹaoh king of Egypt. They worshipped other gods, 8 they followed the customs of the nations that Jehovah had driven out from before the Israelites, and they followed the customs that the kings of Israel had established. 9 The Israelites were pursuing the things that were not right according to Jehovah their God. They kept building high places in all their cities, from watchtower to fortified city. 10 They kept setting up for themselves sacred pillars and sacred poles on every high hill and under every luxuriant tree; 11 and on all the high places they would make sacrificial smoke just as the nations did that Jehovah had driven into exile from before them. They kept doing wicked things to offend Jehovah.12 They continued to serve disgusting idols, about which Jehovah had told them: “You must not do this!” 13 Jehovah kept warning Israel and Judah through all his prophets and every visionary, saying: “Turn back from your wicked ways! Keep my commandments and my statutes according to all the law that I commanded your forefathers and that I sent to you through my servants the prophets.” 14 But they did not listen, and they remained just as stubborn as their forefathers who had not shown faith in Jehovah their God. 15 They continued rejecting his regulations and his covenant that he had made with their forefathers and his reminders that he had given to warn them, and they kept following worthless idols and became worthless themselves, imitating the nations all around them that Jehovah had commanded them not to imitate.16 They kept leaving all the commandments of Jehovah their God, and they made metal statues of two calves and a sacred pole, and they bowed down to all the army of the heavens and served Baʹal. 17 They also made their sons and their daughters pass through the fire, they practiced divination and looked for omens, and they kept devoting themselves to do what was bad in the eyes of Jehovah, to offend him.18 So Jehovah was very angry with Israel, so that he removed them from his sight. He did not let any remain but the tribe of Judah alone.19 Even Judah did not keep the commandments of Jehovah their God; they also walked in the customs that Israel followed. 20 Jehovah rejected all the descendants of Israel and humiliated them and gave them into the hand of plunderers, until he had cast them away from before him. 21 He ripped Israel away from the house of David, and they made Jer·o·boʹam the son of Neʹbat king. But Jer·o·boʹam caused Israel to stray from following Jehovah, and he caused them to commit a great sin. 22 And the people of Israel kept walking in all the sins that Jer·o·boʹam had committed. They did not depart from them 23 until Jehovah removed Israel from his sight, just as he had declared through all his servants the prophets. So Israel was taken into exile from its land to As·syrʹi·a, where they remain to this day.24 The king of As·syrʹi·a then brought people from Babylon, Cuʹthah, Avʹva, Haʹmath, and Seph·ar·vaʹim and settled them in the cities of Sa·marʹi·a in place of the Israelites; they took possession of Sa·marʹi·a and lived in its cities. 25 When they first began dwelling there, they did not fear Jehovah. So Jehovah sent lions among them, and they killed some of the people. 26 It was reported to the king of As·syrʹi·a: “The nations that you have taken into exile and resettled in the cities of Sa·marʹi·a do not know the religion of the God of the land. So he keeps sending lions among them, which are putting them to death, because none of them know the religion of the God of the land.”27 At that the king of As·syrʹi·a commanded: “Have one of the priests whom you took into exile from there return to live there and to teach them the religion of the God of the land.” 28 So one of the priests whom they had taken into exile from Sa·marʹi·a came back to live in Bethʹel, and he began to teach them how they should fear Jehovah.29 However, each different nation made their own god, which they placed in the houses of worship on the high places that the Sa·marʹi·tans had made; each different nation did so in their cities where they were living. 30 So the men of Babylon made Sucʹcoth-beʹnoth, the men of Cuth made Nerʹgal, the men of Haʹmath made A·shiʹma, 31 and the Avʹvites made Nibʹhaz and Tarʹtak. The Seʹphar·vites would burn their sons in the fire to A·dramʹme·lech and A·namʹme·lech, the gods of Seph·ar·vaʹim. 32 Although they feared Jehovah, they appointed priests for the high places from the people in general, and these officiated for them at the houses of worship on the high places. 33 Thus, they feared Jehovah, but they worshipped their own gods according to the religion of the nations from which they had been deported.34 To this day they follow their former religions. None of them worship Jehovah, and none follow his statutes, his judgments, the Law, and the commandment that Jehovah gave the sons of Jacob, whose name he changed to Israel. 35 When Jehovah made a covenant with them, he commanded them: “You must not fear other gods, and you must not bow down to them or serve them or sacrifice to them. 36 But Jehovah, who brought you up out of the land of Egypt with great power and an outstretched arm, is the One you should fear, and to him you should bow down, and to him you should sacrifice. 37 And the regulations, the judgments, the Law, and the commandment that he wrote for you, you should always follow carefully, and you must not fear other gods. 38 And you must not forget the covenant that I made with you, and you must not fear other gods. 39 But it is Jehovah your God whom you should fear, as he is the one who will rescue you out of the hand of all your enemies.”40 But they did not obey, and they followed their former religion. 41 So these nations came to fear Jehovah, but they were also serving their own graven images. Both their sons and their grandsons have done just as their forefathers did, down to this day.
18 In the third year of Ho·sheʹa the son of Eʹlah the king of Israel, Hez·e·kiʹah the son of King Aʹhaz of Judah became king. 2 He was 25 years old when he became king, and he reigned for 29 years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Aʹbi the daughter of Zech·a·riʹah. 3 He kept doing what was right in Jehovah’s eyes, just as David his forefather had done. 4 He was the one who removed the high places, smashed the sacred pillars, and cut down the sacred pole. He also crushed the copper serpent that Moses had made; for down to that time the people of Israel had been making sacrificial smoke to it and it used to be called the copper serpent-idol. 5 He trusted in Jehovah the God of Israel; there was no one like him among all the kings of Judah after him nor among those prior to him. 6 He held fast to Jehovah. He did not turn away from following him; he continued to keep the commandments that Jehovah had given to Moses. 7 And Jehovah was with him. Wherever he went, he acted wisely. He rebelled against the king of As·syrʹi·a and refused to serve him. 8 He also defeated the Phi·lisʹtines clear to Gazʹa and its territories, from watchtower to fortified city.9 In the fourth year of King Hez·e·kiʹah, that is, the seventh year of Ho·sheʹa the son of Eʹlah the king of Israel, King Shal·man·eʹser of As·syrʹi·a came up against Sa·marʹi·a and began to lay siege to it. 10 They captured it at the end of three years; in the sixth year of Hez·e·kiʹah, which was the ninth year of King Ho·sheʹa of Israel, Sa·marʹi·a was captured. 11 Then the king of As·syrʹi·a took Israel into exile in As·syrʹi·a and settled them in Haʹlah and in Haʹbor at the river Goʹzan and in the cities of the Medes. 12 This was because they had not listened to the voice of Jehovah their God but kept violating his covenant, all that Moses the servant of Jehovah had commanded. They neither listened nor obeyed.13 In the 14th year of King Hez·e·kiʹah, Sen·nachʹer·ib the king of As·syrʹi·a came up against all the fortified cities of Judah and captured them. 14 So King Hez·e·kiʹah of Judah sent word to the king of As·syrʹi·a at Laʹchish: “I am at fault. Withdraw from against me, and I will give whatever you may impose on me.” The king of As·syrʹi·a imposed on King Hez·e·kiʹah of Judah a fine of 300 silver talents and 30 gold talents. 15 So Hez·e·kiʹah gave all the silver that could be found at the house of Jehovah and in the treasuries of the king’s house. 16 At that time Hez·e·kiʹah removed the doors of the temple of Jehovah and the doorposts that King Hez·e·kiʹah of Judah himself had overlaid, and he gave them to the king of As·syrʹi·a.17 The king of As·syrʹi·a then sent the Tarʹtan, the Rabʹsa·ris, and the Rabʹsha·keh with a vast army from Laʹchish to King Hez·e·kiʹah in Jerusalem. They went up to Jerusalem and took up a position by the conduit of the upper pool, which is at the highway of the laundryman’s field. 18 When they called for the king to come out, E·liʹa·kim son of Hil·kiʹah, who was in charge of the household, Shebʹnah the secretary, and Joʹah son of Aʹsaph the recorder came out to them.19 So the Rabʹsha·keh said to them: “Please, say to Hez·e·kiʹah, ‘This is what the great king, the king of As·syrʹi·a, says: “What is the basis for your confidence? 20 You are saying, ‘I have a strategy and the power to wage war,’ but these are empty words. In whom have you put your trust, so that you dare to rebel against me? 21 Look! You trust in the support of this crushed reed, Egypt, which if a man should lean on it would enter into his palm and pierce it. That is the way Pharʹaoh king of Egypt is to all those who trust in him. 22 And if you should say to me, ‘We trust in Jehovah our God,’ is he not the one whose high places and altars Hez·e·kiʹah has removed, while he says to Judah and Jerusalem, ‘You should bow down before this altar in Jerusalem’?”’ 23 So now make this wager, please, with my lord the king of As·syrʹi·a: I will give you 2,000 horses if you are able to find enough riders for them. 24 How, then, could you drive back even one governor who is the least of my lord’s servants, while you put your trust in Egypt for chariots and for horsemen? 25 Now is it without authorization from Jehovah that I have come up against this place to destroy it? Jehovah himself said to me, ‘Go up against this land and destroy it.’”26 At this E·liʹa·kim son of Hil·kiʹah, and Shebʹnah and Joʹah said to the Rabʹsha·keh: “Speak to your servants, please, in the Ar·a·maʹic language, for we can understand it; do not speak to us in the language of the Jews in the hearing of the people on the wall.” 27 But the Rabʹsha·keh said to them: “Is it just to your lord and to you that my lord sent me to speak these words? Is it not also to the men who sit on the wall, those who will eat their own excrement and drink their own urine along with you?”28 Then the Rabʹsha·keh stood and called out loudly in the language of the Jews, saying: “Hear the word of the great king, the king of As·syrʹi·a. 29 This is what the king says, ‘Do not let Hez·e·kiʹah deceive you, for he is not able to rescue you out of my hand. 30 And do not let Hez·e·kiʹah cause you to trust in Jehovah by saying: “Jehovah will surely rescue us, and this city will not be given into the hand of the king of As·syrʹi·a.” 31 Do not listen to Hez·e·kiʹah, for this is what the king of As·syrʹi·a says: “Make peace with me and surrender, and each of you will eat from his own vine and from his own fig tree and will drink the water of his own cistern, 32 until I come and take you to a land like your own land, a land of grain and new wine, a land of bread and vineyards, a land of olive trees and honey. Then you will live and not die. Do not listen to Hez·e·kiʹah, for he misleads you by saying, ‘Jehovah will rescue us.’ 33 Have any of the gods of the nations rescued their land out of the hand of the king of As·syrʹi·a? 34 Where are the gods of Haʹmath and Arʹpad? Where are the gods of Seph·ar·vaʹim, Heʹna, and Ivʹvah? Have they rescued Sa·marʹi·a out of my hand? 35 Who among all the gods of the lands have rescued their land out of my hand, so that Jehovah should rescue Jerusalem out of my hand?”’”36 But the people kept silent and did not say a word to him in reply, for the order of the king was, “You must not answer him.” 37 But E·liʹa·kim son of Hil·kiʹah, who was in charge of the household, Shebʹnah the secretary, and Joʹah son of Aʹsaph the recorder came to Hez·e·kiʹah with their garments ripped apart and told him the words of the Rabʹsha·keh.
19 As soon as King Hez·e·kiʹah heard this, he ripped his garments apart and covered himself with sackcloth and went into the house of Jehovah. 2 Then he sent E·liʹa·kim, who was in charge of the household, Shebʹnah the secretary, and the elders of the priests, covered with sackcloth, to the prophet Isaiah, the son of Aʹmoz. 3 They said to him: “This is what Hez·e·kiʹah says, ‘This day is a day of distress, of rebuke, and of disgrace; for the children are ready to be born, but there is no strength to give birth. 4 Perhaps Jehovah your God will hear all the words of the Rabʹsha·keh, whom the king of As·syrʹi·a his lord sent to taunt the living God, and he will call him to account for the words that Jehovah your God has heard. So offer up a prayer in behalf of the remnant who have survived.’”5 So the servants of King Hez·e·kiʹah went in to Isaiah, 6 and Isaiah said to them: “This is what you should say to your lord, ‘This is what Jehovah says: “Do not be afraid because of the words that you heard, the words with which the attendants of the king of As·syrʹi·a blasphemed me. 7 Here I am putting a thought in his mind, and he will hear a report and return to his own land; and I will make him fall by the sword in his own land.”’”8 After the Rabʹsha·keh heard that the king of As·syrʹi·a had pulled away from Laʹchish, he returned to him and found him fighting against Libʹnah. 9 Now the king heard it said about King Tir·haʹkah of E·thi·oʹpi·a: “Here he has come out to fight against you.” So he sent messengers again to Hez·e·kiʹah, saying: 10 “This is what you should say to King Hez·e·kiʹah of Judah, ‘Do not let your God in whom you trust deceive you by saying: “Jerusalem will not be given into the hand of the king of As·syrʹi·a.” 11 Look! You have heard what the kings of As·syrʹi·a did to all the lands by devoting them to destruction. Will you alone be rescued? 12 Did the gods of the nations that my forefathers destroyed rescue them? Where are Goʹzan, Haʹran, Reʹzeph, and the people of Eʹden who were in Tel-asʹsar? 13 Where is the king of Haʹmath, the king of Arʹpad, and the king of the cities of Seph·ar·vaʹim, and of Heʹna, and of Ivʹvah?’”14 Hez·e·kiʹah took the letters out of the hand of the messengers and read them. Hez·e·kiʹah then went up to the house of Jehovah and spread them out before Jehovah. 15 And Hez·e·kiʹah began to pray before Jehovah and say: “O Jehovah the God of Israel, sitting enthroned above the cherubs, you alone are the true God of all the kingdoms of the earth. You made the heavens and the earth. 16 Incline your ear, O Jehovah, and hear! Open your eyes, O Jehovah, and see! Hear the words that Sen·nachʹer·ib has sent to taunt the living God. 17 It is a fact, O Jehovah, that the kings of As·syrʹi·a have devastated the nations and their lands. 18 And they have thrown their gods into the fire, because they were not gods but the work of human hands, wood and stone. That is why they could destroy them. 19 But now, O Jehovah our God, please save us out of his hand, so that all the kingdoms of the earth may know that you alone are God, O Jehovah.”20 Isaiah son of Aʹmoz then sent this message to Hez·e·kiʹah: “This is what Jehovah the God of Israel says, ‘I have heard your prayer to me concerning King Sen·nachʹer·ib of As·syrʹi·a. 21 This is the word that Jehovah has spoken against him:“The virgin daughter of Zion despises you, she scoffs at you.The daughter of Jerusalem shakes her head at you.22 Whom have you taunted and blasphemed?Against whom have you raised your voiceAnd lifted your arrogant eyes?It is against the Holy One of Israel!23 Through your messengers you have taunted Jehovah and said,‘With the multitude of my war chariotsI will ascend the heights of mountains,The remotest parts of Lebʹa·non.I will cut down its lofty cedars, its choice juniper trees.I will enter its farthest retreats, its densest forests.24 I will dig wells and drink foreign waters;I will dry up all the streams of Egypt with the soles of my feet.’25 Have you not heard? From long ago it was determined.From days gone by I have prepared it.Now I will bring it about.You will turn fortified cities into desolate piles of ruins.26 Their inhabitants will be helpless;They will be terrified and put to shame.They will become as vegetation of the field and green grass,As grass of the roofs that is scorched by the east wind.27 But I well know when you sit, when you go out, when you come in,And when you are enraged against me,28 Because your rage against me and your roaring have reached my ears.So I will put my hook in your nose and my bridle between your lips,And I will lead you back the way you came.”29 “‘And this will be the sign for you: This year you will eat what grows on its own; and in the second year you will eat grain that sprouts from that; but in the third year you will sow seed and reap, and you will plant vineyards and eat their fruitage. 30 Those of the house of Judah who escape, those who are left, will take root downward and produce fruit upward. 31 For a remnant will go out of Jerusalem and survivors from Mount Zion. The zeal of Jehovah of armies will do this.32 “‘Therefore this is what Jehovah says about the king of As·syrʹi·a:“He will not come into this cityOr shoot an arrow thereOr confront it with a shieldOr cast up a siege rampart against it.33 By the way he came he will return;He will not come into this city,” declares Jehovah.34 “I will defend this city and save it for my own sakeAnd for the sake of my servant David.”’”35 On that very night the angel of Jehovah went out and struck down 185,000 men in the camp of the As·syrʹi·ans. When people rose up early in the morning, they saw all the dead bodies. 36 So King Sen·nachʹer·ib of As·syrʹi·a departed and returned to Ninʹe·veh and stayed there. 37 And as he was bowing down at the house of his god Nisʹroch, his own sons A·dramʹme·lech and Shar·eʹzer struck him down with the sword and then escaped to the land of Arʹa·rat. And his son Eʹsar-hadʹdon became king in his place.
2 When Jehovah was about to take E·liʹjah up to the heavens in a windstorm, E·liʹjah and E·liʹsha went out from Gilʹgal. 2 E·liʹjah said to E·liʹsha: “Stay here, please, because Jehovah has sent me on to Bethʹel.” But E·liʹsha said: “As surely as Jehovah is living and as you are living, I will not leave you.” So they went down to Bethʹel. 3 Then the sons of the prophets in Bethʹel came out to E·liʹsha and said to him: “Do you know that today Jehovah is taking your master away from headship over you?” At this he said: “I already know it. Be silent.”4 E·liʹjah now said to him: “E·liʹsha, stay here, please, because Jehovah has sent me on to Jerʹi·cho.” But he said: “As surely as Jehovah is living and as you are living, I will not leave you.” So they came to Jerʹi·cho. 5 Then the sons of the prophets who were in Jerʹi·cho approached E·liʹsha and said to him: “Do you know that today Jehovah is taking your master away from headship over you?” At this he said: “I already know it. Be silent.”6 E·liʹjah now said to him: “Stay here, please, because Jehovah has sent me on to the Jordan.” But he said: “As surely as Jehovah is living and as you are living, I will not leave you.” So both of them went on. 7 And 50 of the sons of the prophets also went and stood watching from a distance while the two of them stood by the Jordan. 8 Then E·liʹjah took his official garment and rolled it up and struck the waters, and they were divided to the left and to the right, so that both of them went across on the dry ground.9 As soon as they had gone across, E·liʹjah said to E·liʹsha: “Ask what you want me to do for you before I am taken from you.” So E·liʹsha said: “Please, may I receive a double portion of your spirit?” 10 He replied: “You have asked a difficult thing. If you see me when I am taken from you, it will happen for you that way; but if you do not, it will not happen.”11 As they were walking along, speaking as they walked, suddenly a fiery chariot and fiery horses made a separation between the two of them, and E·liʹjah ascended to the heavens in the windstorm. 12 While E·liʹsha was watching, he was crying out: “My father, my father! The chariot of Israel and his horsemen!” When he could no longer see him, he took hold of his own garments and ripped them into two pieces. 13 After that he picked up the official garment of E·liʹjah that had fallen off him and went back and stood by the bank of the Jordan. 14 Then he took the official garment of E·liʹjah that had fallen off him and struck the waters and said: “Where is Jehovah, the God of E·liʹjah?” When he struck the waters, they were divided to the left and to the right, so that E·liʹsha went across.15 When the sons of the prophets at Jerʹi·cho saw him from a distance, they said: “The spirit of E·liʹjah has settled down on E·liʹsha.” So they went to meet him and bowed down to the ground before him. 16 They said to him: “Here are 50 capable men with your servants. Let them go, please, to look for your master. Perhaps the spirit of Jehovah has lifted him up and then thrown him on one of the mountains or in one of the valleys.” But he said: “Do not send them.” 17 However, they kept urging him until he was embarrassed, so he said: “Send them.” They sent the 50 men, who kept looking for three days but did not find him. 18 When they returned to him, he was staying in Jerʹi·cho. Then he said to them: “Did I not tell you not to go?”19 In time the men of the city said to E·liʹsha: “My master can see that the city is well-situated; but the water is bad, and the land is barren.” 20 At that he said: “Bring me a small new bowl and put salt in it.” So they brought it to him. 21 Then he went out to the source of the water and threw salt into it and said: “This is what Jehovah says, ‘I have healed this water. No more will it cause death or barrenness.’” 22 And the water has been healed down to this day, according to the word spoken by E·liʹsha.23 He went up from there to Bethʹel. As he was going along the way, some young boys came out from the city and began to jeer at him, and they kept saying to him: “Go up, you baldhead! Go up, you baldhead!” 24 Finally he turned around and looked at them and cursed them in the name of Jehovah. Then two she-bears came out of the forest and tore 42 of the children to pieces. 25 He kept going from there to Mount Carʹmel, and from there he returned to Sa·marʹi·a.
20 In those days Hez·e·kiʹah became sick and was at the point of death. The prophet Isaiah the son of Aʹmoz came and said to him, “This is what Jehovah says: ‘Give instructions to your household, for you will die; you will not recover.’” 2 At that he turned his face to the wall and began to pray to Jehovah: 3 “I beg you, O Jehovah, remember, please, how I have walked before you faithfully and with a complete heart, and I have done what was good in your eyes.” And Hez·e·kiʹah began to weep profusely.4 Isaiah had not yet gone out to the middle courtyard when Jehovah’s word came to him, saying: 5 “Go back and say to Hez·e·kiʹah, the leader of my people, ‘This is what Jehovah the God of David your forefather says: “I have heard your prayer. I have seen your tears. Here I am healing you. On the third day you will go up to the house of Jehovah. 6 I will add 15 years to your life, and I will rescue you and this city out of the hand of the king of As·syrʹi·a, and I will defend this city for my own sake and for the sake of David my servant.”’”7 Isaiah then said: “Bring a cake of pressed dried figs.” So they brought it and applied it to the boil, after which he gradually recovered.8 Hez·e·kiʹah had asked Isaiah: “What is the sign to show that Jehovah will heal me and that I will go up on the third day to the house of Jehovah?” 9 Isaiah replied: “This is the sign from Jehovah to show you that Jehovah will carry out the word that he has spoken: Do you want the shadow on the stairway to move forward ten steps or back ten steps?” 10 Hez·e·kiʹah said: “It is an easy thing for the shadow to extend itself ten steps but not to go back ten steps.” 11 So Isaiah the prophet called out to Jehovah, and He made the shadow on the stairway of Aʹhaz go back ten steps after it had already descended the steps.12 At that time the king of Babylon, Be·roʹdach-balʹa·dan son of Balʹa·dan, sent letters and a gift to Hez·e·kiʹah, for he had heard that Hez·e·kiʹah had been sick. 13 Hez·e·kiʹah welcomed them and showed them his entire treasure-house—the silver, the gold, the balsam oil and other precious oil, his armory, and everything that was to be found in his treasuries. There was nothing that Hez·e·kiʹah did not show them in his own house and in all his dominion.14 After that Isaiah the prophet came in to King Hez·e·kiʹah and asked him: “What did these men say, and where did they come from?” So Hez·e·kiʹah said: “They came from a distant land, from Babylon.” 15 Next he asked: “What did they see in your house?” Hez·e·kiʹah replied: “They saw everything in my house. There was nothing that I did not show them in my treasuries.”16 Isaiah now said to Hez·e·kiʹah: “Hear the word of Jehovah, 17 ‘Look! Days are coming, and all that is in your house and all that your forefathers have stored up to this day will be carried off to Babylon. Nothing will be left,’ says Jehovah. 18 ‘And some of your own sons to whom you will become father will be taken and will become court officials in the palace of the king of Babylon.’”19 At that Hez·e·kiʹah said to Isaiah: “The word of Jehovah that you have spoken is good.” Then he added: “It is good if there will be peace and stability during my lifetime.”20 As for the rest of the history of Hez·e·kiʹah, all his mightiness and how he made the pool and the conduit and brought the water into the city, is it not written in the book of the history of the times of the kings of Judah? 21 Then Hez·e·kiʹah was laid to rest with his forefathers; and his son Ma·nasʹseh became king in his place.
21 Ma·nasʹseh was 12 years old when he became king, and he reigned for 55 years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Hephʹzi·bah. 2 He did what was bad in Jehovah’s eyes, following the detestable practices of the nations that Jehovah had driven out from before the people of Israel. 3 He rebuilt the high places that his father Hez·e·kiʹah had destroyed, and he set up altars to Baʹal and made a sacred pole, just as Aʹhab the king of Israel had done. And he bowed down to all the army of the heavens and served them. 4 He also built altars in the house of Jehovah, about which Jehovah had said: “In Jerusalem, I will put my name.” 5 And he built altars to all the army of the heavens in two courtyards of the house of Jehovah. 6 And he made his own son pass through the fire; he practiced magic, looked for omens, and appointed spirit mediums and fortune-tellers. He did on a grand scale what was bad in Jehovah’s eyes, to offend him.7 He put the carved image of the sacred pole that he made into the house about which Jehovah had said to David and to his son Solʹo·mon: “In this house and in Jerusalem, which I have chosen out of all the tribes of Israel, I will permanently put my name. 8 And I will never again make the feet of Israel wander from the land that I gave to their forefathers, provided they carefully observe all that I have commanded them, the entire Law that my servant Moses ordered them to follow.” 9 But they did not obey, and Ma·nasʹseh kept leading them astray, causing them to do greater evil than the nations that Jehovah had annihilated from before the Israelites.10 Jehovah kept speaking through his servants the prophets, saying: 11 “Ma·nasʹseh the king of Judah has done all these detestable things; he has acted more wickedly than all the Amʹor·ites before him, and he has made Judah sin with his disgusting idols. 12 Therefore this is what Jehovah the God of Israel says: ‘Here I am bringing such a disaster on Jerusalem and Judah that it will make both ears of anyone who hears about it tingle. 13 And I will stretch out on Jerusalem the measuring line applied to Sa·marʹi·a and use the leveling tool applied to the house of Aʹhab, and I will wipe Jerusalem clean, just as one wipes a bowl clean, wiping it and turning it upside down. 14 I will forsake the remnant of my inheritance and give them into the hand of their enemies, and they will become plunder and spoil to all their enemies, 15 because they did what was bad in my eyes and were continually offending me from the day that their forefathers came out of Egypt to this day.’”16 Ma·nasʹseh also shed innocent blood in very great quantity until he had filled Jerusalem from one end to the other, besides his sin of causing Judah to sin by doing what was bad in the eyes of Jehovah. 17 As for the rest of the history of Ma·nasʹseh and all that he did and the sins that he committed, are they not written in the book of the history of the times of the kings of Judah? 18 Then Ma·nasʹseh was laid to rest with his forefathers and was buried in the garden of his house, in the garden of Uzʹza; and his son Aʹmon became king in his place.19 Aʹmon was 22 years old when he became king, and he reigned for two years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Me·shulʹle·meth the daughter of Haʹruz from Jotʹbah. 20 He continued to do what was bad in Jehovah’s eyes, just as his father Ma·nasʹseh had done. 21 He kept walking in all the ways that his father walked, and he continued serving and bowing down to the disgusting idols that his father had served. 22 So he abandoned Jehovah the God of his forefathers, and he did not walk in the way of Jehovah. 23 Eventually Aʹmon’s servants conspired against him and put the king to death in his own house. 24 But the people of the land struck down all those who conspired against King Aʹmon, and they made his son Jo·siʹah king in his place. 25 As for the rest of the history of Aʹmon, what he did, is it not written in the book of the history of the times of the kings of Judah? 26 So they buried him in his grave in the garden of Uzʹza, and his son Jo·siʹah became king in his place.
22 Jo·siʹah was eight years old when he became king, and he reigned for 31 years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Je·diʹdah the daughter of A·daiʹah from Bozʹkath. 2 He did what was right in Jehovah’s eyes and walked in all the ways of David his forefather, and he did not deviate to the right or to the left.3 In the 18th year of King Jo·siʹah, the king sent Shaʹphan the secretary, the son of Az·a·liʹah the son of Me·shulʹlam, to the house of Jehovah, saying: 4 “Go up to Hil·kiʹah the high priest, and let him collect all the money that is being brought into the house of Jehovah, which the doorkeepers have collected from the people. 5 Have them give it to those appointed over the work in the house of Jehovah who, in turn, will give it to the workers in the house of Jehovah who are to repair the damage to the house, 6 that is, to the craftsmen, the builders, and the masons; and they are to use it to buy timbers and hewn stones to repair the house. 7 But no accounting should be required of them for the money that they are given, because they are trustworthy.”8 Later Hil·kiʹah the high priest said to Shaʹphan the secretary: “I have found the book of the Law in the house of Jehovah.” So Hil·kiʹah gave the book to Shaʹphan, who began to read it. 9 Then Shaʹphan the secretary went to the king and told him: “Your servants have poured out the money that was found in the house, and they have handed it over to those appointed over the work in the house of Jehovah.” 10 Shaʹphan the secretary also told the king: “There is a book that Hil·kiʹah the priest has given me.” Then Shaʹphan began to read it before the king.11 As soon as the king heard the words of the book of the Law, he ripped his garments apart. 12 Then the king gave this order to Hil·kiʹah the priest, A·hiʹkam the son of Shaʹphan, Achʹbor the son of Mi·caiʹah, Shaʹphan the secretary, and A·saiʹah the king’s servant: 13 “Go, inquire of Jehovah in my behalf, in behalf of the people, and in behalf of all Judah concerning the words of this book that has been found; for Jehovah’s rage that has been set ablaze against us is great, because our forefathers did not obey the words of this book by observing all that is written concerning us.”14 So Hil·kiʹah the priest, A·hiʹkam, Achʹbor, Shaʹphan, and A·saiʹah went to Hulʹdah the prophetess. She was the wife of Shalʹlum son of Tikʹvah son of Harʹhas, the caretaker of the wardrobe, and she was dwelling in the Second Quarter of Jerusalem; and they spoke to her there. 15 She said to them: “This is what Jehovah the God of Israel says, ‘Tell the man who sent you to me: 16 “This is what Jehovah says, ‘I will bring calamity on this place and its inhabitants, all the words of the book that the king of Judah has read. 17 Because they have abandoned me and are making sacrifices smoke to other gods in order to offend me with all the work of their hands, my rage will be set ablaze against this place and it will not be extinguished.’” 18 But to the king of Judah who sent you to inquire of Jehovah, this is what you should say to him, “This is what Jehovah the God of Israel says: ‘Regarding the words that you have heard, 19 because your heart was responsive and you humbled yourself before Jehovah on hearing what I have spoken against this place and its inhabitants—that they would become an object of horror and a curse—and you ripped your garments apart and wept before me, I also have heard you, declares Jehovah. 20 That is why I will gather you to your ancestors, and you will be laid in your grave in peace, and your eyes will not see all the calamity that I will bring on this place.’”’” Then they brought the reply to the king.
23 So the king sent word, and they summoned all the elders of Judah and Jerusalem. 2 After that the king went up to the house of Jehovah with all the men of Judah, all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the priests, and the prophets—all the people, from small to great. He read in their hearing all the words of the book of the covenant that had been found in the house of Jehovah. 3 The king stood by the pillar and made a covenant before Jehovah, that he would follow Jehovah and keep his commandments, his reminders, and his statutes with all his heart and with all his soul by carrying out the words of this covenant that were written in this book. And all the people agreed to the covenant.4 The king then ordered Hil·kiʹah the high priest, the priests of the second rank, and the doorkeepers to bring out from the temple of Jehovah all the utensils made for Baʹal, for the sacred pole, and for all the army of the heavens. Then he burned them outside Jerusalem on the terraces of Kidʹron, and he took their ashes to Bethʹel. 5 So he put out of business the foreign-god priests, whom the kings of Judah had appointed to make sacrificial smoke on the high places in the cities of Judah and the surroundings of Jerusalem, as well as those making sacrificial smoke to Baʹal, to the sun, to the moon, to the constellations of the zodiac, and to all the army of the heavens. 6 He brought the sacred pole out from the house of Jehovah to the outskirts of Jerusalem, to the Kidʹron Valley, and he burned it in the Kidʹron Valley and ground it to dust and scattered its dust on the graves of the common people. 7 He also tore down the houses of the male temple prostitutes, which were in the house of Jehovah and where the women were weaving tent shrines for the sacred pole.8 Then he brought all the priests out of the cities of Judah, and he made unfit for worship the high places where the priests had been making sacrificial smoke, from Geʹba to Beʹer-sheʹba. He also tore down the high places of the gates that were at the entrance of the gate of Joshua the chief of the city, which were on the left as one entered the city gate. 9 The priests of the high places did not serve at the altar of Jehovah in Jerusalem, but they did eat unleavened bread along with their brothers. 10 He also made unfit for worship Toʹpheth, which is in the Valley of the Sons of Hinʹnom, so that no one could make his son or his daughter pass through the fire to Moʹlech. 11 And he prohibited the horses that the kings of Judah had dedicated to the sun from entering the house of Jehovah by the chamber of Naʹthan-melʹech the court official, which was in the porticoes; and he burned the chariots of the sun in the fire. 12 The king also tore down the altars that the kings of Judah had set up on the roof of Aʹhaz’s upper chamber, as well as the altars that Ma·nasʹseh had set up in two courtyards of the house of Jehovah. He crushed them and scattered their dust in the Kidʹron Valley. 13 And the king made unfit for worship the high places in front of Jerusalem that were to the south of the Mount of Ruination, which Solʹo·mon the king of Israel had built to Ashʹto·reth the disgusting goddess of the Si·doʹni·ans; and to Cheʹmosh the disgusting god of Moʹab; and to Milʹcom the detestable god of the Amʹmon·ites. 14 He broke the sacred pillars to pieces and cut down the sacred poles and filled their places with human bones. 15 He also tore down the altar in Bethʹel, the high place that Jer·o·boʹam the son of Neʹbat had made that caused Israel to sin. After tearing down that altar and the high place, he burned the high place, ground it to dust, and burned the sacred pole.16 When Jo·siʹah turned and saw the graves on the mountain, he had the bones taken from the graves and burned them on the altar, making it unfit for worship, according to Jehovah’s word that had been proclaimed by the man of the true God who foretold that these things would happen. 17 Then he said: “What is the gravestone over there that I am looking at?” At this the men of the city said to him: “It is the grave of the man of the true God from Judah who foretold these things that you have done against the altar of Bethʹel.” 18 So he said: “Let him rest. Do not let anyone disturb his bones.” So they left his bones undisturbed, as well as the bones of the prophet who had come from Sa·marʹi·a.19 Jo·siʹah also removed all the houses of worship on the high places that were in the cities of Sa·marʹi·a, which the kings of Israel had built to offend God, and he did the same thing to them that he had done at Bethʹel. 20 So he sacrificed on the altars all the priests of the high places who were there, and he burned human bones on them. After that he returned to Jerusalem.21 The king now commanded all the people: “Hold a Passover to Jehovah your God as is written in this book of the covenant.” 22 No Passover like this had been held since the days when the judges had judged Israel or in all the days of the kings of Israel and the kings of Judah. 23 But in the 18th year of King Jo·siʹah, this Passover to Jehovah was held in Jerusalem.24 Jo·siʹah also cleared out the spirit mediums, the fortune-tellers, the teraphim statues, the disgusting idols, and all the disgusting things that had appeared in the land of Judah and in Jerusalem, in order to carry out the words of the Law that were written in the book that Hil·kiʹah the priest had found in the house of Jehovah. 25 There was no king like him prior to him, who returned to Jehovah with all his heart and with all his soul and with all his strength, according to all the Law of Moses; nor did anyone like him rise up after him.26 Nevertheless, Jehovah did not turn away from his burning anger that blazed against Judah because of all the offensive things that Ma·nasʹseh had done to offend Him. 27 Jehovah said: “I will also remove Judah from my sight, just as I removed Israel; and I will reject this city that I chose, Jerusalem, and the house about which I said, ‘My name will continue there.’”28 As for the rest of the history of Jo·siʹah, all that he did, is it not written in the book of the history of the times of the kings of Judah? 29 In his days Pharʹaoh Neʹchoh the king of Egypt came to meet the king of As·syrʹi·a by the Eu·phraʹtes River, and King Jo·siʹah went out to confront him; but when Neʹchoh saw him, he put him to death at Me·gidʹdo. 30 So his servants transported his dead body in a chariot from Me·gidʹdo and brought him to Jerusalem and buried him in his grave. Then the people of the land took Jo·siʹah’s son Je·hoʹa·haz and anointed him and made him king in place of his father.31 Je·hoʹa·haz was 23 years old when he became king, and he reigned for three months in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Ha·muʹtal the daughter of Jeremiah from Libʹnah. 32 He began to do what was bad in Jehovah’s eyes, according to all that his forefathers had done. 33 Pharʹaoh Neʹchoh imprisoned him at Ribʹlah in the land of Haʹmath, to keep him from reigning in Jerusalem, and then imposed on the land a fine of 100 silver talents and a gold talent. 34 Furthermore, Pharʹaoh Neʹchoh made Jo·siʹah’s son E·liʹa·kim king in place of his father Jo·siʹah and changed his name to Je·hoiʹa·kim; but he took Je·hoʹa·haz and brought him to Egypt, where he eventually died. 35 Je·hoiʹa·kim gave the silver and the gold to Pharʹaoh, but he had to tax the land to give the silver that Pharʹaoh demanded. He exacted an assessed amount of silver and gold from each of the people of the land to give to Pharʹaoh Neʹchoh.36 Je·hoiʹa·kim was 25 years old when he became king, and he reigned for 11 years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Ze·biʹdah the daughter of Pe·daiʹah from Ruʹmah. 37 He continued to do what was bad in Jehovah’s eyes, according to all that his forefathers had done.
24 In Je·hoiʹa·kim’s days King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon came against him, and Je·hoiʹa·kim became his servant for three years. However, he turned against him and rebelled. 2 Then Jehovah began to send against him marauder bands of Chal·deʹans, Syrians, Moʹab·ites, and Amʹmon·ites. He kept sending them against Judah to destroy it, according to Jehovah’s word that he had spoken through his servants the prophets. 3 Surely it was by the order of Jehovah that this happened to Judah, to remove them from his sight because of all the sins that Ma·nasʹseh had committed, 4 and also the innocent blood that he had shed, for he had filled Jerusalem with innocent blood and Jehovah was not willing to forgive.5 As for the rest of the history of Je·hoiʹa·kim, all that he did, is it not written in the book of the history of the times of the kings of Judah? 6 Then Je·hoiʹa·kim was laid to rest with his forefathers; and his son Je·hoiʹa·chin became king in his place.7 Never again did the king of Egypt venture out of his land, for the king of Babylon had taken all that belonged to the king of Egypt, from the Wadi of Egypt up to the Eu·phraʹtes River.8 Je·hoiʹa·chin was 18 years old when he became king, and he reigned for three months in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Ne·hushʹta the daughter of El·naʹthan of Jerusalem. 9 He continued to do what was bad in Jehovah’s eyes, according to all that his father had done. 10 During that time the servants of King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon came up against Jerusalem, and the city came under siege. 11 King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon came to the city while his servants were laying siege to it.12 King Je·hoiʹa·chin of Judah went out to the king of Babylon, along with his mother, his servants, his princes, and his court officials; and the king of Babylon took him captive in the eighth year of his reign. 13 Then he took out from there all the treasures of the house of Jehovah and the treasures of the king’s house. He cut into pieces all the gold utensils that Solʹo·mon the king of Israel had made in the temple of Jehovah, just as Jehovah had foretold. 14 He took into exile all Jerusalem, all the princes, all the mighty warriors, and every craftsman and metalworker—he took 10,000 into exile. No one was left behind except the poorest people of the land. 15 Thus he took Je·hoiʹa·chin into exile to Babylon; he also led away the king’s mother, the king’s wives, his court officials, and the foremost men of the land, taking them into exile from Jerusalem to Babylon. 16 The king of Babylon also took into exile to Babylon all the warriors, 7,000, as well as 1,000 craftsmen and metalworkers, all of them mighty men and trained for war. 17 The king of Babylon made Mat·ta·niʹah, Je·hoiʹa·chin’s uncle, king in his place and changed his name to Zed·e·kiʹah.18 Zed·e·kiʹah was 21 years old when he became king, and he reigned for 11 years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Ha·muʹtal the daughter of Jeremiah from Libʹnah. 19 He continued to do what was bad in Jehovah’s eyes, according to all that Je·hoiʹa·kim had done. 20 It was because of Jehovah’s anger that these things took place in Jerusalem and in Judah, until he cast them out of his sight. And Zed·e·kiʹah rebelled against the king of Babylon.
25 In the ninth year of Zed·e·kiʹah’s reign, in the tenth month, on the tenth day of the month, King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon came with all his army against Jerusalem. He camped against it and built a siege wall all around it, 2 and the city was under siege until the 11th year of King Zed·e·kiʹah. 3 On the ninth day of the fourth month the famine was severe in the city, and there was no food for the people of the land. 4 The city wall was broken through, and all the soldiers fled by night through the gate between the double wall near the king’s garden, while the Chal·deʹans were surrounding the city; and the king went by the way of the Arʹa·bah. 5 But the Chal·deʹan army pursued the king, and they overtook him in the desert plains of Jerʹi·cho, and all his troops were scattered from his side. 6 Then they seized the king and brought him up to the king of Babylon at Ribʹlah, and they passed sentence on him. 7 They slaughtered Zed·e·kiʹah’s sons before his eyes; then Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar blinded Zed·e·kiʹah’s eyes, bound him with copper fetters, and brought him to Babylon.8 In the fifth month, on the seventh day of the month, that is, in the 19th year of King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar the king of Babylon, Neb·uʹzar·adʹan the chief of the guard, the servant of the king of Babylon, came to Jerusalem. 9 He burned down the house of Jehovah, the king’s house, and all the houses of Jerusalem; he also burned down the house of every prominent man. 10 And the walls surrounding Jerusalem were pulled down by the entire Chal·deʹan army that was with the chief of the guard. 11 Neb·uʹzar·adʹan the chief of the guard took into exile the rest of the people who were left in the city, the deserters who had gone over to the king of Babylon, and the rest of the population. 12 But the chief of the guard left some of the poorest people of the land to serve as vinedressers and as compulsory laborers. 13 And the Chal·deʹans broke into pieces the copper pillars of the house of Jehovah and the carriages and the copper Sea that were in the house of Jehovah, and they carried the copper away to Babylon. 14 They also took the cans, the shovels, the extinguishers, the cups, and all the copper utensils used in the temple service. 15 The chief of the guard took the fire holders and the bowls that were of genuine gold and silver. 16 As for the two pillars, the Sea, and the carriages that Solʹo·mon had made for the house of Jehovah, the copper of all these articles was beyond weighing. 17 Each pillar was 18 cubits high, and the capital on it was of copper; and the height of the capital was three cubits, and the network and pomegranates all around on the capital were all made of copper. The second pillar with its network was like it.18 The chief of the guard also took Se·raiʹah the chief priest, Zeph·a·niʹah the second priest, and the three doorkeepers. 19 And he took from the city one court official who was the commissioner over the soldiers, five close associates of the king who were found in the city, as well as the secretary of the chief of the army, the one mustering the people of the land, and 60 men of the common people of the land who were yet found in the city. 20 Neb·uʹzar·adʹan the chief of the guard took them and brought them to the king of Babylon at Ribʹlah. 21 The king of Babylon struck them down and put them to death at Ribʹlah in the land of Haʹmath. Thus Judah went into exile from its land.22 King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon appointed Ged·a·liʹah the son of A·hiʹkam the son of Shaʹphan over the people whom he had left behind in the land of Judah. 23 When all the army chiefs and their men heard that the king of Babylon had appointed Ged·a·liʹah, they immediately came to Ged·a·liʹah at Mizʹpah. They were Ishʹma·el the son of Neth·a·niʹah, Jo·haʹnan the son of Ka·reʹah, Se·raiʹah the son of Tan·huʹmeth the Ne·tophʹa·thite, and Ja·az·a·niʹah the son of the Ma·acʹa·thite, together with their men. 24 Ged·a·liʹah swore an oath to them and their men and said to them: “Do not be afraid of being servants to the Chal·deʹans. Live in the land and serve the king of Babylon, and it will go well with you.”25 And in the seventh month, Ishʹma·el son of Neth·a·niʹah son of E·lishʹa·ma, who was of the royal line, came with ten other men, and they struck down Ged·a·liʹah and he died, along with the Jews and the Chal·deʹans who were with him in Mizʹpah. 26 After that all the people, from small to great, including the army chiefs, rose up and went to Egypt, for they were afraid of the Chal·deʹans.27 And in the 37th year of the exile of King Je·hoiʹa·chin of Judah, in the 12th month, on the 27th day of the month, King Eʹvil-merʹo·dach of Babylon, in the year he became king, released King Je·hoiʹa·chin of Judah from prison. 28 He spoke kindly with him and put his throne higher than the thrones of the other kings who were with him in Babylon. 29 So Je·hoiʹa·chin took off his prison garments, and he regularly ate before him all the days of his life. 30 A regular allowance of food was given him from the king, day after day, all the days of his life.
3 Je·hoʹram the son of Aʹhab became king over Israel in Sa·marʹi·a in the 18th year of King Je·hoshʹa·phat of Judah, and he reigned for 12 years. 2 He kept doing what was bad in Jehovah’s eyes, but not to the extent of his father or his mother, for he removed the sacred pillar of Baʹal that his father had made. 3 However, he clung to the sins that Jer·o·boʹam the son of Neʹbat had caused Israel to commit. He did not depart from them.4 Now Meʹsha the king of Moʹab was a sheep raiser, and he used to pay 100,000 lambs and 100,000 unshorn rams as tribute to the king of Israel. 5 As soon as Aʹhab died, the king of Moʹab revolted against the king of Israel. 6 So King Je·hoʹram went out on that day from Sa·marʹi·a and mustered all Israel. 7 He also sent a message to King Je·hoshʹa·phat of Judah, saying: “The king of Moʹab has revolted against me. Will you go with me to war against Moʹab?” To this he said: “I will go. I am the same as you. My people are the same as your people. My horses are the same as your horses.” 8 Then he asked: “By which way should we go up?” He replied: “By the way of the wilderness of Eʹdom.”9 The king of Israel then set out with the king of Judah and the king of Eʹdom. After they journeyed roundabout for seven days, there was no water for the camp and for the domestic animals that were following behind them. 10 The king of Israel said: “How terrible! Jehovah has called these three kings, only to give them into the hand of Moʹab!” 11 At that Je·hoshʹa·phat said: “Is there no prophet of Jehovah here through whom we may inquire of Jehovah?” So one of the servants of the king of Israel answered: “There is E·liʹsha the son of Shaʹphat, who used to pour out water on the hands of E·liʹjah.” 12 Then Je·hoshʹa·phat said: “The word of Jehovah is with him.” So the king of Israel and Je·hoshʹa·phat and the king of Eʹdom went down to him.13 E·liʹsha said to the king of Israel: “What do I have to do with you? Go to the prophets of your father and to the prophets of your mother.” But the king of Israel said to him: “No, for it is Jehovah who has called these three kings to give them into the hand of Moʹab.” 14 To this E·liʹsha said: “As surely as Jehovah of armies whom I serve is living, if I did not have regard for King Je·hoshʹa·phat of Judah, I would not look at you or take notice of you. 15 Now bring me a harpist.” As soon as the harpist started playing, the hand of Jehovah came on him. 16 He said, “This is what Jehovah says: ‘Dig trench after trench in this valley, 17 for this is what Jehovah says: “You will not see wind, and you will not see rain; yet this valley will be filled with water, and you will drink from it, you, your livestock, and your other animals.”’ 18 But this is a trivial thing in the eyes of Jehovah, for he will also give Moʹab into your hand. 19 You must strike down every fortified city and every choice city, you should cut down every good tree, you should stop up all the springs of water, and you should ruin every good plot of land with stones.”20 And in the morning, at the time of the morning grain offering, water was suddenly coming from the direction of Eʹdom, and the land became filled with the water.21 All the Moʹab·ites heard that the kings had come up to fight against them, so they called together all the men who could bear arms, and they stationed themselves at the border. 22 When they got up early in the morning, the sun was shining on the water, and to the Moʹab·ites on the opposite side, the water looked red like blood. 23 They said: “This is blood! The kings have surely slaughtered one another with the sword. So, then, to the spoil, O Moʹab!” 24 When they came into the camp of Israel, the Israelites rose up and began striking down the Moʹab·ites, who fled from them. They advanced into Moʹab, striking the Moʹab·ites down as they went. 25 They tore down the cities, and each man threw a stone into every good plot of land, filling it with stones; they stopped up every spring of water, and they cut down every good tree. Finally only the stone walls of Kir-harʹe·seth remained standing, and the slingers surrounded it and struck it down.26 When the king of Moʹab saw that the battle was lost, he took with him 700 men armed with swords to break through to the king of Eʹdom; but they were not able to. 27 So he took his firstborn son who was going to reign in his place and offered him up as a burnt sacrifice on the wall. And there came to be great indignation against Israel, so they withdrew from against him and returned to their land.
4 Now one of the wives of the sons of the prophets cried out to E·liʹsha, saying: “Your servant my husband is dead, and you well know that your servant had always feared Jehovah. Now a creditor has come to take both of my children as his slaves.” 2 At this E·liʹsha said to her: “What can I do for you? Tell me, what do you have in the house?” She replied: “Your servant has nothing at all in the house but a jar of oil.” 3 Then he said: “Go outside, ask for containers from all your neighbors, empty containers. Do not limit yourself to a few. 4 Then go in and close the door behind you and your sons. Fill all these containers, and set the full ones aside.” 5 So she left him.When she closed the door behind her and her sons, they passed the containers to her, and she kept pouring. 6 When the containers were full, she said to one of her sons: “Bring another container to me.” But he said to her: “There are no more containers.” At that the oil stopped. 7 So she came in and told the man of the true God, and he said: “Go, sell the oil and pay off your debts, and you and your sons can live from what is left.”8 One day E·liʹsha went to Shuʹnem, where there was a prominent woman, and she urged him to eat a meal there. As often as he would pass by, he would stop there to eat. 9 So she said to her husband: “I know that it is a holy man of God who comes this way regularly. 10 Please, let us make a small room on the roof and put there for him a bed, a table, a chair, and a lampstand. Then, whenever he comes to us, he can stay there.”11 One day he came there, and he went to the room on the roof to lie down. 12 He then said to Ge·haʹzi his attendant: “Call this Shuʹnam·mite woman.” So he called her, and she stood before him. 13 Then he said to Ge·haʹzi: “Please tell her, ‘Here you have gone to all this trouble for us. What can be done for you? Should I speak in your behalf to the king or to the chief of the army?’” But her reply was: “I am living among my own people.” 14 So he said: “Then what can be done for her?” Ge·haʹzi now said: “Well, she does not have a son, and her husband is old.” 15 Immediately he said: “Call her.” So he called her, and she stood at the doorway. 16 Then he said: “At this time next year, you will be embracing a son.” But she said: “No, my master, man of the true God! Do not tell lies to your servant.”17 However, the woman became pregnant and gave birth to a son at the same time the next year, just as E·liʹsha had told her. 18 The child grew up, and one day he went out to his father, who was with the reapers. 19 He kept saying to his father: “My head, O my head!” Then his father said to the attendant: “Carry him to his mother.” 20 So he carried him back to his mother, and he sat on her lap until noon, and then he died. 21 Then she went up and laid him on the bed of the man of the true God, and she shut the door behind her and left. 22 She now called her husband and said: “Send me, please, one of the attendants and one of the donkeys, and let me go quickly to the man of the true God and return.” 23 But he said: “Why are you going to see him today? It is not a new moon or a sabbath.” However, she said: “Everything is all right.” 24 So she saddled the donkey and said to her attendant: “Go quickly. Do not slow down for me unless I tell you to.”25 So she went to the man of the true God at Mount Carʹmel. As soon as the man of the true God saw her from afar, he said to Ge·haʹzi his attendant: “Look! The Shuʹnam·mite woman is over there. 26 Please run to meet her and ask her, ‘Are you well? Is your husband well? Is your child well?’” To this she said: “All is well.” 27 When she came to the man of the true God at the mountain, she at once grabbed hold of his feet. At this Ge·haʹzi came near to push her away, but the man of the true God said: “Let her alone, for she is in bitter distress, and Jehovah has hidden it from me and has not told me.” 28 She then said: “Did I ask my lord for a son? Did I not say, ‘You must not give me a false hope’?”29 He immediately said to Ge·haʹzi: “Wrap your garments around your waist and take my staff in your hand and go. If you encounter anyone, do not greet him; and if anyone should greet you, do not answer him. Go and place my staff on the boy’s face.” 30 At this the boy’s mother said: “As surely as Jehovah is living and as you yourself are living, I will not leave you.” So he got up and went with her. 31 Ge·haʹzi went before them and put the staff on the boy’s face, but there was no sound or response. He went back to meet E·liʹsha and told him: “The boy did not wake up.”32 When E·liʹsha came into the house, the boy was lying dead on his bed. 33 He went in and closed the door behind them both and began to pray to Jehovah. 34 Then he got up on the bed and lay down on the child and put his own mouth on the boy’s mouth, his own eyes on his eyes, and his own palms on his palms and kept bent over him, and the child’s body started to grow warm. 35 He walked back and forth in the house, and he got up on the bed and bent over him again. The boy sneezed seven times, after which he opened his eyes. 36 E·liʹsha now called Ge·haʹzi and said: “Call the Shuʹnam·mite woman.” So he called her and she came in to him. Then he said: “Pick up your son.” 37 And she came in and fell at his feet and bowed down to the ground before him, after which she picked up her son and went out.38 When E·liʹsha returned to Gilʹgal, there was famine in the land. The sons of the prophets were sitting before him, and he said to his attendant: “Put the large pot on and boil stew for the sons of the prophets.” 39 So one of them went out to the field to pick mallows, and he found a wild vine and picked wild gourds from it, filling his garment. He then returned and sliced them into the stewpot, not knowing what they were. 40 They later served it to the men to eat, but as soon as they ate from the stew, they cried out: “There is death in the pot, O man of the true God.” And they could not eat it. 41 So he said: “Bring some flour.” After he threw it into the pot, he said: “Serve it to the people.” And nothing harmful was in the pot.42 A man came from Baʹal-shalʹi·shah, and he brought the man of the true God 20 loaves of barley bread made from the first ripe fruits, as well as a bag of new grain. Then E·liʹsha said: “Give it to the people so that they may eat.” 43 However, his attendant said: “How can I set this before 100 men?” To this he said: “Give it to the people so that they may eat, for this is what Jehovah says, ‘They will eat and have some left over.’” 44 At that he put it before them, and they ate and they had some left over, according to the word of Jehovah.
5 Now Naʹa·man the army chief of the king of Syria was a prominent man who was held in esteem by his lord, because through him Jehovah had given victory to Syria. He was a mighty warrior, although he was a leper. 2 On one of their raids, the Syrians had taken captive from the land of Israel a little girl who became a servant to Naʹa·man’s wife. 3 She said to her mistress: “If only my lord would visit the prophet in Sa·marʹi·a! Then he would cure him of his leprosy.” 4 So he went and reported to his lord, telling him what the girl from Israel had said.5 Then the king of Syria said: “Go now! And I will send a letter to the king of Israel.” So he went, taking with him ten talents of silver, 6,000 pieces of gold, and ten changes of garments. 6 He brought to the king of Israel the letter, which read: “Along with this letter that has come to you, I send my servant Naʹa·man so that you may cure him of his leprosy.” 7 As soon as the king of Israel read the letter, he ripped his garments apart and said: “Am I God, to put to death and to keep alive? For he is sending this man to me, telling me to cure him of his leprosy! You can see for yourselves that he is seeking a quarrel with me.”8 But when E·liʹsha the man of the true God heard that the king of Israel had ripped his garments apart, he at once sent word to the king: “Why did you rip your garments apart? Please let him come to me so that he may know that there is a prophet in Israel.” 9 So Naʹa·man came with his horses and his war chariots and stood at the entrance of the house of E·liʹsha. 10 However, E·liʹsha sent a messenger to tell him: “Go, wash seven times in the Jordan, and your flesh will be restored, and you will be clean.” 11 At this Naʹa·man became indignant and started to leave, saying: “Here I said to myself, ‘He will come out to me and stand here and call on the name of Jehovah his God, moving his hand back and forth over the leprosy to cure it.’ 12 Are not the A·baʹnah and the Pharʹpar, the rivers of Damascus, better than all the waters of Israel? Can I not wash in them and become clean?” With that he turned and went away in a rage.13 His servants now approached him and said: “My father, if the prophet had told you to do something extraordinary, would you not do it? How much more, then, since he only said to you, ‘Wash and be clean’?” 14 At that he went down and plunged into the Jordan seven times, according to the word of the man of the true God. Then his flesh was restored like the flesh of a little boy, and he became clean.15 After that he went back to the man of the true God, he and all his entourage, and he stood before him and said: “Now I know that there is no God anywhere in all the earth but in Israel. Now accept, please, a gift from your servant.” 16 However, E·liʹsha said: “As surely as Jehovah whom I serve is living, I will not accept it.” He urged him to accept it, but he kept refusing. 17 Finally Naʹa·man said: “If not, please, let your servant be given two mule-loads of soil from this land, for your servant will no longer offer a burnt offering or a sacrifice to any gods other than Jehovah. 18 But may Jehovah forgive your servant for this one thing: When my lord goes into the house of Rimʹmon to bow down there, he supports himself on my arm, so I have to bow down at the house of Rimʹmon. When I bow down at the house of Rimʹmon, may Jehovah, please, forgive your servant for this.” 19 At this he said to him: “Go in peace.” After he departed from him and had traveled for some distance, 20 Ge·haʹzi the attendant of E·liʹsha the man of the true God said to himself: ‘Here my master has spared this Syrian Naʹa·man by not accepting from him what he brought. As surely as Jehovah is living, I will run after him and take something from him.’ 21 So Ge·haʹzi chased after Naʹa·man. When Naʹa·man saw someone running after him, he got down from his chariot to meet him and said: “Is everything all right?” 22 To this he said: “All is well. My master has sent me, saying, ‘Look! Just now two young men from the mountainous region of Eʹphra·im from the sons of the prophets came to me. Give them, please, a talent of silver and two changes of garments.’” 23 Naʹa·man said: “Go on, take two talents.” He kept urging him, and he wrapped up two talents of silver in two bags, with two changes of garments, and gave them to two of his attendants, who carried them before him.24 When he reached Oʹphel, he took them from their hand and put them in the house and sent the men away. After they left, 25 he went in and stood by his master. E·liʹsha now said to him: “Where did you come from, Ge·haʹzi?” But he said: “Your servant did not go anywhere.” 26 E·liʹsha said to him: “Was my heart not there with you when the man got down from his chariot to meet you? Is it a time to accept silver or to accept garments or olive groves or vineyards or sheep or cattle or male or female servants? 27 Now Naʹa·man’s leprosy will stick to you and your descendants forever.” Immediately he went out from before him a leper, white as snow.
6 The sons of the prophets said to E·liʹsha: “Look! The place where we are staying with you is too cramped for us. 2 Please let us go to the Jordan. Let each of us take a log from there and make a place there where we can dwell.” He said: “Go.” 3 One of them said: “Will you please come along with your servants?” At that he said: “I will come.” 4 So he went with them, and they came to the Jordan and began to cut down the trees. 5 As one of them was cutting down a tree, the axhead fell into the water, and he cried out: “Alas, my master, it was borrowed!” 6 The man of the true God said: “Where did it fall?” So he showed him the place. He then cut off a piece of wood and threw it there and made the axhead float. 7 He said: “Lift it out.” So he reached out his hand and took it.8 Now the king of Syria went to war against Israel. He consulted with his servants and said: “I will encamp at such and such a place with you.” 9 Then the man of the true God sent word to the king of Israel, saying: “Beware of passing by this place, because that is where the Syrians are coming down.” 10 So the king of Israel sent word to the place that the man of the true God had warned him about. He kept warning him, and he stayed away from there on several occasions.11 This enraged the king of Syria, so he summoned his servants and said to them: “Tell me! Who among us is on the side of the king of Israel?” 12 Then one of his servants said: “None of us, my lord the king! It is E·liʹsha the prophet in Israel who tells the king of Israel the things that you say in your own bedroom.” 13 He said: “Go and find out where he is, so that I may send men to capture him.” Later the report was made to him: “He is in Doʹthan.” 14 He immediately sent horses and war chariots there, as well as a large army; they came by night and surrounded the city.15 When the attendant of the man of the true God rose early and went outside, he saw that an army with horses and war chariots was surrounding the city. At once the attendant said to him: “Alas, my master! What are we to do?” 16 But he said: “Do not be afraid! For there are more who are with us than those who are with them.” 17 Then E·liʹsha began to pray and say: “O Jehovah, open his eyes, please, that he may see.” Immediately Jehovah opened the attendant’s eyes and he saw, and look! the mountainous region was full of horses and war chariots of fire all around E·liʹsha.18 When the Syrians came down to him, E·liʹsha prayed to Jehovah and said: “Please, strike this nation with blindness.” So he struck them with blindness, just as E·liʹsha had requested. 19 E·liʹsha now said to them: “This is not the way, and this is not the city. Follow me, and let me lead you to the man you are looking for.” However, he led them to Sa·marʹi·a.20 When they arrived in Sa·marʹi·a, E·liʹsha said: “O Jehovah, open their eyes so that they may see.” So Jehovah opened their eyes, and they saw that they were in the middle of Sa·marʹi·a. 21 When the king of Israel saw them, he said to E·liʹsha: “Should I strike them down, should I strike them down, my father?” 22 But he said: “You must not strike them down. Do you strike down those whom you have taken captive with your sword and with your bow? Give them bread and water so they may eat and drink and return to their lord.” 23 So he spread a great feast for them, and they ate and drank, after which he sent them away to return to their lord. And not once did the marauder bands of the Syrians come again into the land of Israel.24 Afterward Ben-haʹdad the king of Syria gathered all his army together and went up and besieged Sa·marʹi·a. 25 So there was a great famine in Sa·marʹi·a, and they besieged it until a donkey’s head was worth 80 silver pieces, and a fourth of a cab measure of dove’s droppings was worth 5 silver pieces. 26 As the king of Israel was passing by on the wall, a woman cried out to him: “Help us, O my lord the king!” 27 To this he said: “If Jehovah does not help you, where can I get help for you? From the threshing floor? Or from the wine or oil press?” 28 The king asked her: “What is the matter with you?” She replied: “This woman said to me, ‘Hand over your son, and we will eat him today, and we will eat my son tomorrow.’ 29 So we boiled my son and ate him. The next day I said to her, ‘Hand over your son so that we may eat him.’ But she hid her son.”30 As soon as the king heard the woman’s words, he ripped his garments apart. When he passed by on the wall, the people saw that he was wearing sackcloth under his clothes. 31 Then he said: “So may God do to me and add to it if the head of E·liʹsha the son of Shaʹphat remains on him today!”32 E·liʹsha was sitting in his house, and the elders were sitting with him. The king sent a man ahead of him, but before the messenger arrived, E·liʹsha said to the elders: “Have you seen how this son of a murderer has sent to take off my head? Watch when the messenger comes, close the door, and hold the door shut against him. Is not the sound of his lord’s footsteps behind him?” 33 While he was still speaking with them, the messenger came to him, and the king said: “This calamity is from Jehovah. Why should I wait any longer for Jehovah?”
7 E·liʹsha now said, “Listen to the word of Jehovah. This is what Jehovah says: ‘Tomorrow about this time at the gate of Sa·marʹi·a, a seah measure of fine flour will be worth a shekel, and two seah measures of barley will be worth a shekel.’” 2 At that the adjutant whom the king relied on said to the man of the true God: “Even if Jehovah should open floodgates in the heavens, could this possibly take place?” To that he said: “You will see it with your own eyes, but you will not eat from it.”3 There were four lepers at the entrance of the city gate, and they said to one another: “Why are we sitting here until we die? 4 If we say, ‘Let us go into the city,’ while the famine is in the city, we would die there. And if we sit here, we will die anyway. So now let us go over to the camp of the Syrians. If they spare our lives, we will live, but if they put us to death, then we will die.” 5 They then got up in the evening darkness and entered the camp of the Syrians. When they reached the outskirts of the Syrian camp, there was nobody there.6 For Jehovah had caused the Syrian camp to hear the sound of war chariots and horses, the sound of a huge army. So they said to one another: “Look! The king of Israel has hired the kings of the Hitʹtites and the kings of Egypt to come against us!” 7 They immediately got up and fled in the evening darkness, leaving their tents, horses, donkeys, and the whole camp just as it was, and they fled for their lives.8 When these lepers reached the outskirts of the camp, they entered into one of the tents and began to eat and drink. They carried away from there silver, gold, and garments and went and hid them. Then they returned and entered another tent and carried things away from there and went and hid them.9 Finally they said to one another: “What we are doing is not right. This day is a day of good news! If we hesitate and wait until dawn, we will deserve to be punished. Let us now go and report this at the king’s house.” 10 So they went and called out to the gatekeepers of the city and reported to them: “We went into the camp of the Syrians, but nobody was there—we did not hear anyone at all. There were only the horses and donkeys tied and the tents left just as they were.” 11 At once the gatekeepers called out, and it was reported inside the king’s house.12 Immediately the king got up by night and said to his servants: “Please let me tell you what the Syrians have done to us. They know that we are hungry, so they left the camp to hide in the field, saying, ‘They will come out of the city, and we will catch them alive and enter into the city.’” 13 Then one of his servants said: “Please, let some men take five of the remaining horses that are in the city. Look! They will end up the same as all the crowd of Israel that remain here. Look! They will end up the same as all the crowd of Israel that perished. Let us then send them out and see.” 14 So they took two chariots with horses, and the king sent them out to the camp of the Syrians, saying: “Go and see.” 15 They followed them as far as the Jordan, and the entire way was covered with garments and utensils that the Syrians had thrown away as they fled in panic. The messengers returned and reported it to the king.16 The people then went out and plundered the camp of the Syrians, so that a seah measure of fine flour came to be worth a shekel, and two seah measures of barley came to be worth a shekel, according to the word of Jehovah. 17 The king had appointed the adjutant whom he relied on to be in charge of the gate, but the people trampled him to death at the gate, just as the man of the true God had told the king when he came down to him. 18 It happened just as the man of the true God had said to the king: “Two seah measures of barley will be worth a shekel, and a seah measure of fine flour will be worth a shekel tomorrow at this time at the gate of Sa·marʹi·a.” 19 But the adjutant had said to the man of the true God: “Even if Jehovah should open floodgates in the heavens, could such a thing take place?” To this E·liʹsha had said: “You will see it with your own eyes, but you will not eat from it.” 20 That is exactly what happened to him, because the people trampled him to death at the gate.
8 E·liʹsha said to the woman whose son he had restored to life: “Rise up and go, you with your household, and live as a foreigner wherever you can, for Jehovah has declared a famine, and it will come on the land for seven years.” 2 So the woman got up and did what the man of the true God said. She went with her household and settled in the land of the Phi·lisʹtines for seven years.3 At the end of seven years, the woman returned from the land of the Phi·lisʹtines and went to appeal to the king for her house and her field. 4 Now the king was speaking to Ge·haʹzi the attendant of the man of the true God, saying: “Relate to me, please, all the great things that E·liʹsha has done.” 5 Just as he was relating to the king how he had restored the dead one to life, the woman whose son he had restored to life came to the king, appealing for her house and her field. At once Ge·haʹzi said: “My lord the king, this is the woman, and this is her son, whom E·liʹsha restored to life.” 6 At that the king asked the woman, and she related the story to him. Then the king assigned her a court official, telling him: “Return all that belongs to her and all the products of the field from the day she left the land until now.”7 E·liʹsha came to Damascus when Ben-haʹdad the king of Syria was sick. So the report was made to him: “The man of the true God has come here.” 8 At that the king said to Hazʹa·el: “Take a gift with you and go and meet the man of the true God. Inquire of Jehovah through him, asking, ‘Will I recover from this sickness?’” 9 Hazʹa·el went to meet him and took a gift with him, every sort of good thing of Damascus, the load of 40 camels. He came and stood before him and said: “Your son, Ben-haʹdad the king of Syria, has sent me to you, asking, ‘Will I recover from this sickness?’” 10 E·liʹsha replied to him: “Go and tell him, ‘You will certainly recover,’ but Jehovah has shown me that he will certainly die.” 11 And he kept staring at him to the point of embarrassment. Then the man of the true God gave way to weeping. 12 Hazʹa·el asked: “Why is my lord weeping?” He replied: “Because I know what harm you will do to the people of Israel. Their fortified places you will set on fire, their choice men you will kill with the sword, their children you will dash to pieces, and their pregnant women you will rip open.” 13 Hazʹa·el said: “How could your servant, who is a mere dog, do such a deed?” But E·liʹsha said: “Jehovah has shown me that you will be king over Syria.”14 Then he left E·liʹsha and returned to his own lord, who said to him: “What did E·liʹsha say to you?” He replied: “He told me that you will certainly recover.” 15 But the next day, Hazʹa·el took a coverlet, dipped it in water, and held it over his face until he died. And Hazʹa·el became king in his place.16 In the fifth year of Je·hoʹram the son of Aʹhab the king of Israel, while Je·hoshʹa·phat was king of Judah, Je·hoʹram the son of King Je·hoshʹa·phat of Judah became king. 17 He was 32 years old when he became king, and he reigned for eight years in Jerusalem. 18 He walked in the way of the kings of Israel, just as those of the house of Aʹhab had done, for Aʹhab’s daughter had become his wife; and he kept doing what was bad in Jehovah’s eyes. 19 But Jehovah did not want to bring Judah to ruin for the sake of David his servant, since he had promised him to give a lamp to him and to his sons always.20 In his days Eʹdom revolted against Judah and then set up its own king. 21 So Je·hoʹram crossed over to Zaʹir with all his chariots, and he rose up by night and defeated the Eʹdom·ites who were surrounding him and the chariot commanders; and the troops fled to their tents. 22 But Eʹdom has kept up its revolt against Judah to this day. Libʹnah also revolted at that time.23 And the rest of the history of Je·hoʹram, all that he did, is it not written in the book of the history of the times of the kings of Judah? 24 Then Je·hoʹram was laid to rest with his forefathers and was buried with his forefathers in the City of David. And his son A·ha·ziʹah became king in his place.25 In the 12th year of Je·hoʹram the son of Aʹhab the king of Israel, A·ha·ziʹah the son of King Je·hoʹram of Judah became king. 26 A·ha·ziʹah was 22 years old when he became king, and he reigned for one year in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Ath·a·liʹah the granddaughter of King Omʹri of Israel. 27 He walked in the way of the house of Aʹhab and kept doing what was bad in Jehovah’s eyes, like the house of Aʹhab, for he was related to the house of Aʹhab by marriage. 28 So he went with Je·hoʹram the son of Aʹhab to wage war against King Hazʹa·el of Syria at Raʹmoth-gilʹe·ad, but the Syrians wounded Je·hoʹram. 29 So King Je·hoʹram returned to Jezʹre·el to recover from the wounds that the Syrians had inflicted on him at Raʹmah when he fought against King Hazʹa·el of Syria. A·ha·ziʹah the son of Je·hoʹram the king of Judah went down to Jezʹre·el to see Je·hoʹram the son of Aʹhab, because he had been wounded.
9 E·liʹsha the prophet then called one of the sons of the prophets and said to him: “Wrap your garments around your waist, and quickly take this flask of oil with you and go to Raʹmoth-gilʹe·ad. 2 When you arrive there, look for Jeʹhu the son of Je·hoshʹa·phat the son of Nimʹshi; go in and have him get up from among his brothers and take him into the innermost room. 3 Then take the flask of oil and pour it out on his head and say, ‘This is what Jehovah says: “I anoint you as king over Israel.”’ Then open the door and flee without delay.”4 So the prophet’s attendant got on his way to Raʹmoth-gilʹe·ad. 5 When he arrived, the army chiefs were seated there. He said: “I have a message for you, O chief.” Jeʹhu asked: “For which one of us?” He said: “For you, O chief.” 6 So Jeʹhu got up and went into the house; the attendant poured the oil out on his head and said to him, “This is what Jehovah the God of Israel says: ‘I anoint you as king over Jehovah’s people, over Israel. 7 You must strike down the house of Aʹhab your lord, and I will avenge the blood of my servants the prophets and of all the servants of Jehovah who died at the hands of Jezʹe·bel. 8 And the whole house of Aʹhab will perish; and I will annihilate from Aʹhab every male, including the helpless and weak in Israel. 9 And I will make the house of Aʹhab like the house of Jer·o·boʹam the son of Neʹbat and like the house of Baʹa·sha the son of A·hiʹjah. 10 As for Jezʹe·bel, the dogs will eat her up in the plot of land at Jezʹre·el, and no one will bury her.’” With that he opened the door and fled.11 When Jeʹhu went back to the servants of his lord, they asked him: “Is everything all right? Why did this crazy man come to you?” He answered them: “You know that sort of man and his sort of talk.” 12 But they said: “That is not true! Tell us, please.” Then he said: “This is what he said to me, and then he added, ‘This is what Jehovah says: “I anoint you as king over Israel.”’” 13 At this each of them quickly took his garment and put it under him on the bare steps, and they blew the horn and said: “Jeʹhu has become king!” 14 Then Jeʹhu the son of Je·hoshʹa·phat the son of Nimʹshi conspired against Je·hoʹram.Je·hoʹram had been on guard at Raʹmoth-gilʹe·ad, he with all Israel, because of King Hazʹa·el of Syria. 15 King Je·hoʹram later returned to Jezʹre·el to recover from the wounds that the Syrians inflicted on him when he fought King Hazʹa·el of Syria.Jeʹhu now said: “If you agree, do not let anyone escape from the city to go and report this in Jezʹre·el.” 16 Then Jeʹhu mounted his chariot and went to Jezʹre·el, for Je·hoʹram was lying there wounded, and King A·ha·ziʹah of Judah had gone down to see Je·hoʹram. 17 As the watchman was standing on the tower in Jezʹre·el, he saw the throng of Jeʹhu’s men approaching. At once he said: “I see a throng of men.” Je·hoʹram said: “Take a cavalryman and send him to meet them, and let him say, ‘Are you coming in peace?’” 18 So a horseman went to meet him and said: “This is what the king says, ‘Are you coming in peace?’” But Jeʹhu said: “What do you have to do with ‘peace’? Fall in behind me!”The watchman then reported: “The messenger reached them, but he has not returned.” 19 So he sent out a second horseman, who said when he came to them: “This is what the king says, ‘Are you coming in peace?’” But Jeʹhu said: “What do you have to do with ‘peace’? Fall in behind me!”20 The watchman then reported: “He reached them, but he has not returned, and the driving is like the driving of Jeʹhu the grandson of Nimʹshi, for he drives like a madman.” 21 Je·hoʹram said: “Hitch up!” So his war chariot was hitched up and King Je·hoʹram of Israel and King A·ha·ziʹah of Judah each went out in his own war chariot to meet Jeʹhu. They encountered him in the plot of land of Naʹboth the Jezʹre·el·ite.22 As soon as Je·hoʹram saw Jeʹhu, he said: “Are you coming in peace, Jeʹhu?” But he said: “What peace could there be as long as there is the prostitution of Jezʹe·bel your mother and her many sorceries?” 23 At once Je·hoʹram turned his chariot to flee, and he said to A·ha·ziʹah: “We have been tricked, A·ha·ziʹah!” 24 Jeʹhu took his bow in hand and shot Je·hoʹram between the shoulders, and the arrow came out at his heart, and he collapsed in his war chariot. 25 He then said to Bidʹkar his adjutant: “Pick him up and throw him into the field of Naʹboth the Jezʹre·el·ite. Remember, you and I were riding together behind Aʹhab his father when Jehovah himself made this pronouncement against him: 26 ‘“As surely as I saw the blood of Naʹboth and the blood of his sons yesterday,” declares Jehovah, “I will repay you in this very plot of land,” declares Jehovah.’ So now pick him up and throw him into the plot of land, according to the word of Jehovah.”27 When King A·ha·ziʹah of Judah saw what was happening, he fled by way of the garden house. (Later Jeʹhu pursued him and said: “Strike him down also!” So they struck him down in the chariot on his way up to Gur, which is by Ibʹle·am. But he continued his flight to Me·gidʹdo and died there. 28 Then his servants carried him in a chariot to Jerusalem, and they buried him in his grave with his forefathers in the City of David. 29 It was in the 11th year of Je·hoʹram the son of Aʹhab that A·ha·ziʹah had become king over Judah.)30 When Jeʹhu came to Jezʹre·el, Jezʹe·bel heard of it. So she painted her eyes with black paint and adorned her head and looked down through the window. 31 As Jeʹhu came in through the gate, she said: “Did it go well with Zimʹri, the killer of his lord?” 32 Looking up to the window, he said: “Who is on my side? Who?” Immediately two or three court officials looked down at him. 33 He said: “Throw her down!” So they threw her down, and some of her blood splattered on the wall and on the horses, and he trampled her. 34 After that he went in and ate and drank. He then said: “Please, take care of this accursed woman and bury her. After all, she is the daughter of a king.” 35 But when they went to bury her, they did not find anything but her skull and her feet and the palms of her hands. 36 When they returned and told him, he said: “This fulfills the word of Jehovah that he spoke through his servant E·liʹjah the Tishʹbite, saying, ‘In the plot of land of Jezʹre·el, the dogs will eat the flesh of Jezʹe·bel. 37 And the dead body of Jezʹe·bel will become as manure on the surface of the field in the plot of land of Jezʹre·el, so that they may not say: “This is Jezʹe·bel.”’”
1 After the death of Aʹhab, Moʹab revolted against Israel.2 It was then that A·ha·ziʹah fell down through the grating in his roof chamber in Sa·marʹi·a and was injured. So he sent messengers and said to them: “Go, inquire of Baʹal-zeʹbub the god of Ekʹron to find out whether I will recover from this injury.” 3 But the angel of Jehovah said to E·liʹjah the Tishʹbite: “Rise up, go to meet the messengers of the king of Sa·marʹi·a and say to them, ‘Is it because there is no God in Israel that you are going to inquire of Baʹal-zeʹbub the god of Ekʹron? 4 Therefore this is what Jehovah says: “You will not leave the bed on which you are lying, for you will certainly die.”’” With that E·liʹjah went off.5 When the messengers returned to him, he immediately said to them: “Why have you come back?” 6 They replied to him: “There was a man who came up to meet us, and he said to us, ‘Go, return to the king who sent you and tell him, “This is what Jehovah says: ‘Is it because there is no God in Israel that you are sending to inquire of Baʹal-zeʹbub the god of Ekʹron? Therefore, you will not leave the bed on which you are lying, for you will certainly die.’”’” 7 At this he asked them: “What did the man look like who came up to meet you and spoke these words to you?” 8 So they said to him: “He was a man with a garment of hair and a leather belt around his waist.” Immediately he said: “It was E·liʹjah the Tishʹbite.”9 The king then sent to him a chief of 50 with his 50 men. When he went up to him, he was sitting on the top of the mountain. He said to him: “Man of the true God, the king says, ‘Come down.’” 10 But E·liʹjah answered the chief of the 50: “Well, if I am a man of God, let fire come down from the heavens and consume you and your 50 men.” And fire came down from the heavens and consumed him and his 50 men.11 So the king sent again to him another chief of 50 with his 50 men. He went and said to him: “Man of the true God, this is what the king says, ‘Come down quickly.’” 12 But E·liʹjah answered them: “If I am a man of the true God, let fire come down from the heavens and consume you and your 50 men.” And fire of God came down from the heavens and consumed him and his 50 men.13 Then the king sent again a third chief of 50 and his 50 men. But the third chief of 50 went up and bowed down on his knees in front of E·liʹjah and began to beg for favor and say to him: “Man of the true God, please, let my life and the lives of these 50 servants of yours be precious in your eyes. 14 Fire has already come down from the heavens and consumed the two former chiefs of 50 and their groups of 50, but now let my life be precious in your eyes.”15 At that the angel of Jehovah told E·liʹjah: “Go down with him. Do not be afraid of him.” So he rose and went down with him to the king. 16 E·liʹjah then said to the king, “This is what Jehovah says: ‘You sent messengers to inquire of Baʹal-zeʹbub the god of Ekʹron. Is it because there is no God in Israel? Why did you not inquire of his word? Therefore, you will not leave the bed on which you are lying, for you will certainly die.’” 17 So he died, according to the word of Jehovah that E·liʹjah had spoken; and because he did not have a son, Je·hoʹram became king in his place, in the second year of Je·hoʹram the son of Je·hoshʹa·phat the king of Judah.18 As for the rest of the history of A·ha·ziʹah, what he did, is it not written in the book of the history of the times of the kings of Israel?
10 Now the Phi·lisʹtines were fighting against Israel. And the men of Israel fled from before the Phi·lisʹtines, and many fell slain on Mount Gil·boʹa. 2 The Phi·lisʹtines kept in close range of Saul and his sons, and the Phi·lisʹtines struck down Jonʹa·than, A·binʹa·dab, and Malʹchi-shuʹa, Saul’s sons. 3 The fighting grew fierce against Saul, and the archers found him, and he was wounded by the archers. 4 Then Saul said to his armor-bearer: “Draw your sword and run me through with it, so that these uncircumcised men may not come and deal ruthlessly with me.” But his armor-bearer was unwilling, because he was very much afraid. So Saul took the sword and fell on it. 5 When his armor-bearer saw that Saul was dead, he too fell on his own sword and died. 6 Thus Saul and his three sons died, and all those of his house died together. 7 When all the people of Israel in the valley saw that everyone had fled and that Saul and his sons had died, they began to abandon their cities and flee; the Phi·lisʹtines then came and occupied them.8 The next day, when the Phi·lisʹtines came to strip the slain, they found Saul and his sons fallen on Mount Gil·boʹa. 9 So they stripped him and took off his head and his armor, and they sent word throughout the land of the Phi·lisʹtines to spread the news to their idols and the people. 10 Then they put his armor in the house of their god and fastened his skull to the house of Daʹgon.11 When all those of Jaʹbesh in Gilʹe·ad heard about all that the Phi·lisʹtines had done to Saul, 12 all the warriors rose up and carried off the corpse of Saul and the corpses of his sons. They brought them to Jaʹbesh and buried their bones under the big tree in Jaʹbesh, and they fasted for seven days.13 Thus Saul died for the unfaithfulness he had shown against Jehovah because he had not obeyed the word of Jehovah, also for consulting a spirit medium 14 instead of inquiring of Jehovah. So He put him to death and turned the kingship over to David the son of Jesʹse.
11 In time all the Israelites gathered to David at Hebʹron and said: “Look! We are your own bone and flesh. 2 In times past while Saul was king, you were the one who was leading Israel on its campaigns. And Jehovah your God said to you: ‘You will shepherd my people Israel, and you will become leader over my people Israel.’” 3 So all the elders of Israel came to the king at Hebʹron, and David made a covenant with them in Hebʹron before Jehovah. Then they anointed David as king over Israel, according to Jehovah’s word through Samuel.4 Later David and all Israel set out for Jerusalem, that is, Jeʹbus, where the Jebʹu·sites were inhabiting the land. 5 The inhabitants of Jeʹbus taunted David: “You will never come in here!” However, David captured the stronghold of Zion, which is now the City of David. 6 So David said: “Whoever is the first to strike the Jebʹu·sites will become chief and prince.” And Joʹab the son of Ze·ruʹiah went up first, and he became the chief. 7 Then David took up residence in the stronghold. That is why they called it the City of David. 8 He began to build up the city all around, from the Mound to the areas around it, and Joʹab restored the rest of the city. 9 Thus David became greater and greater, and Jehovah of armies was with him.10 Now these are the heads of David’s mighty warriors, who gave him strong support in his kingship, together with all Israel, to make him king according to Jehovah’s word concerning Israel. 11 This is the list of David’s mighty warriors: Ja·shoʹbe·am the son of a Hachʹmon·ite, the head of the three. He brandished his spear over 300 slain at one time. 12 Next to him was El·e·aʹzar the son of Doʹdo the A·hoʹhite. He was among the three mighty warriors. 13 He was with David at Pas-damʹmim, where the Phi·lisʹtines had gathered together for war. Now there was a plot of land full of barley, and the people had fled because of the Phi·lisʹtines. 14 But he took his stand in the middle of the field and defended it and kept striking down the Phi·lisʹtines, so that Jehovah brought about a great victory.15 Three of the 30 headmen went down to the rock, to David at the cave of A·dulʹlam, while a Phi·lisʹtine army was camped in the Valley of Rephʹa·im. 16 David was then in the stronghold, and a garrison of the Phi·lisʹtines was in Bethʹle·hem. 17 Then David expressed his longing: “If only I could have a drink of the water from the cistern by the gate of Bethʹle·hem!” 18 At that the three forced their way into the camp of the Phi·lisʹtines and drew water from the cistern by the gate of Bethʹle·hem and brought it to David; but David refused to drink it and poured it out to Jehovah. 19 He said: “It is unthinkable on my part from the standpoint of my God to do this! Should I drink the blood of these men who risked their lives? For it was at the risk of their lives that they brought it.” So he refused to drink it. These are the things that his three mighty warriors did.20 A·bishʹai the brother of Joʹab became head of another three; he brandished his spear over 300 slain, and he had a reputation like the three. 21 Of the other three, he was more distinguished than two of them, and he was their chief; yet he did not attain to the rank of the first three.22 Be·naiʹah the son of Je·hoiʹa·da was a courageous man who performed many exploits in Kabʹze·el. He struck down the two sons of Arʹi·el of Moʹab, and he descended into a waterpit on a snowy day and killed a lion. 23 He also struck down an Egyptian man of extraordinary size—five cubits tall. Though the Egyptian had a spear in his hand like the beam of loom workers, he went against him with a rod and snatched the spear away from the Egyptian’s hand and killed him with his own spear. 24 These things Be·naiʹah the son of Je·hoiʹa·da did, and he had a reputation like that of the three mighty warriors. 25 Although he was distinguished even more than the thirty, he did not attain to the rank of the three. However, David appointed him over his own bodyguard.26 The mighty warriors of the military forces were Asʹa·hel the brother of Joʹab, El·haʹnan the son of Doʹdo of Bethʹle·hem, 27 Shamʹmoth the Haʹro·rite, Heʹlez the Pelʹo·nite, 28 Iʹra the son of Ikʹkesh the Te·koʹite, Abi-eʹzer the Anʹa·thoth·ite, 29 Sibʹbe·cai the Huʹshath·ite, Iʹlai the A·hoʹhite, 30 Maʹha·rai the Ne·tophʹa·thite, Heʹled the son of Baʹa·nah the Ne·tophʹa·thite, 31 Iʹthai the son of Riʹbai of Gibʹe·ah of the Benʹja·min·ites, Be·naiʹah the Pirʹa·thon·ite, 32 Huʹrai of the wadis of Gaʹash, A·biʹel the Arʹbath·ite, 33 Azʹma·veth the Ba·haʹrum·ite, E·liʹah·ba the Sha·alʹbo·nite, 34 the sons of Haʹshem the Giʹzo·nite, Jonʹa·than the son of Shaʹgee the Harʹa·rite, 35 A·hiʹam the son of Saʹcar the Harʹa·rite, E·liʹphal the son of Ur, 36 Heʹpher the Me·cheʹrath·ite, A·hiʹjah the Pelʹo·nite, 37 Hezʹro the Carʹmel·ite, Naʹa·rai the son of Ezʹbai, 38 Joel the brother of Nathan, Mibʹhar the son of Hagʹri, 39 Zeʹlek the Amʹmon·ite, Naʹha·rai the Be·rothʹite, the armor-bearer of Joʹab the son of Ze·ruʹiah; 40 Iʹra the Ithʹrite, Gaʹreb the Ithʹrite, 41 U·riʹah the Hitʹtite, Zaʹbad the son of Ahʹlai, 42 Adʹi·na the son of Shiʹza the Reuʹben·ite, a head of the Reuʹben·ites, and 30 with him; 43 Haʹnan the son of Maʹa·cah, Joshʹa·phat the Mithʹnite, 44 Uz·ziʹa the Ashʹte·rath·ite, Shaʹma and Je·iʹel, the sons of Hoʹtham the A·roʹer·ite; 45 Je·diʹa·el the son of Shimʹri, and Joʹha his brother the Tiʹzite; 46 Eʹli·el the Maʹha·vite, Jerʹi·bai and Josh·a·viʹah the sons of Elʹna·am, and Ithʹmah the Moʹab·ite; 47 Eʹli·el, Oʹbed, and Ja·a·siʹel the Me·zoʹba·ite.
12 These were the men who came to David at Zikʹlag while he was unable to move about freely because of Saul the son of Kish, and they were among the mighty warriors who supported him in battle. 2 They were armed with the bow, and they could use both the right hand and the left hand to sling stones or to shoot arrows with the bow. They were of the brothers of Saul, from Benjamin. 3 The head was A·hi·eʹzer, along with Joʹash, both sons of She·maʹah the Gibʹe·ath·ite; Jeʹzi·el and Pelʹet the sons of Azʹma·veth, Berʹa·cah, Jeʹhu the Anʹa·thoth·ite, 4 Ish·maʹiah the Gibʹe·on·ite, a mighty warrior among the thirty and over the thirty; also Jeremiah, Ja·ha·ziʹel, Jo·haʹnan, Joʹza·bad the Ge·deʹrath·ite, 5 E·luʹzai, Jerʹi·moth, Be·a·liʹah, Shem·a·riʹah, Sheph·a·tiʹah the Harʹi·phite, 6 El·kaʹnah, Is·shiʹah, Azʹar·el, Jo·eʹzer, and Ja·shoʹbe·am, the Korʹah·ites; 7 and Jo·eʹlah and Zeb·a·diʹah the sons of Je·roʹham of Geʹdor.8 Some of the Gadʹites went over to David’s side at the stronghold in the wilderness; they were mighty warriors, soldiers trained for war, standing ready with the large shield and the lance, whose faces were like those of lions and who were as swift as the gazelles on the mountains. 9 Eʹzer was the head, O·ba·diʹah the second, E·liʹab the third, 10 Mish·manʹnah the fourth, Jeremiah the fifth, 11 Atʹtai the sixth, Eʹli·el the seventh, 12 Jo·haʹnan the eighth, El·zaʹbad the ninth, 13 Jeremiah the tenth, Machʹban·nai the eleventh. 14 These were of the Gadʹites, heads of the army. The least one was equal to 100, and the greatest to 1,000. 15 These are the men who crossed the Jordan in the first month when it was overflowing its banks, and they chased away all those living in the lowlands, to the east and to the west.16 Some of the men of Benjamin and Judah also came to David at his stronghold. 17 Then David went out before them and said to them: “If you have come to me in peace to help me, my heart will be united with you. But if it is to betray me to my adversaries when my hands have done no wrong, let the God of our forefathers see it and judge.” 18 Then the spirit came upon A·maʹsai, the head of the thirty:“We are yours, O David, and we are with you, O son of Jesʹse.Peace, peace be yours, and peace to the one helping you,For your God is helping you.”So David received them and appointed them among the heads of the troops.19 Some from Ma·nasʹseh also deserted to David when he came with the Phi·lisʹtines to battle against Saul; but he did not help the Phi·lisʹtines, for after consultation, the lords of the Phi·lisʹtines sent him away, saying: “He will desert to his lord Saul, and it will cost us our heads.” 20 When he went to Zikʹlag, these deserted to him from Ma·nasʹseh: Adʹnah, Joʹza·bad, Je·diʹa·el, Miʹcha·el, Joʹza·bad, E·liʹhu, and Zilʹle·thai, heads of the thousands of Ma·nasʹseh. 21 They helped David against the marauder band, because all of them were mighty, courageous men, and they became chiefs in the army. 22 Day after day people kept coming to David to help him until it was a camp as great as the camp of God.23 This is the number of the heads of those armed for battle who came to David at Hebʹron to turn the kingship of Saul over to him according to Jehovah’s order. 24 The men of Judah carrying the large shield and the lance were 6,800, armed for battle. 25 Of the Simʹe·on·ites, the mighty, courageous men of the army were 7,100.26 Of the Levites, 4,600. 27 Je·hoiʹa·da was the leader of the sons of Aaron, and with him were 3,700, 28 as well as Zaʹdok, a mighty and courageous young man, along with 22 chiefs from his paternal house.29 Of the Benʹja·min·ites, the brothers of Saul, there were 3,000, of whom the greater number had previously been guarding the interests of the house of Saul. 30 Of the Eʹphra·im·ites, there were 20,800 mighty, courageous men of fame among their paternal houses.31 Of the half tribe of Ma·nasʹseh, there were 18,000 who had been designated by name to come to make David king. 32 Of the tribe of Isʹsa·char, who understood the times and knew what Israel should do, there were 200 of their headmen, and all their brothers were under their command. 33 Of Zebʹu·lun, there were 50,000 who could serve in the army, drawing up in battle formation with all the weapons of war, all joining David with undivided loyalty. 34 Of Naphʹta·li, there were 1,000 chiefs, and with them were 37,000 with the large shield and the spear. 35 Of the Danʹites, those drawing up in battle formation were 28,600. 36 And of Ashʹer, those who could serve in the army for drawing up in battle formation were 40,000.37 From across the Jordan, of the Reuʹben·ites, the Gadʹites, and the half tribe of Ma·nasʹseh, there were 120,000 soldiers with all kinds of weapons of war. 38 All of these were men of war, joining together in battle line; they came with a complete heart to Hebʹron to make David king over all Israel, and also all the rest of Israel were united in wanting to make David king. 39 And they remained there with David for three days, eating and drinking, for their brothers had made preparation for them. 40 Also those near them, and even those as far as Isʹsa·char, Zebʹu·lun, and Naphʹta·li, were bringing food on donkeys, camels, mules, and cattle—provisions of flour, cakes of pressed figs and raisins, wine, oil, and cattle and sheep in great quantity, for there was rejoicing in Israel.
13 David consulted with the chiefs of the thousands and of the hundreds and with every leader. 2 Then David said to all the congregation of Israel: “If it seems good to you and it is acceptable to Jehovah our God, let us send word to our remaining brothers in all regions of Israel and also to the priests and the Levites in their cities with pastures to come and join us. 3 And let us bring back the Ark of our God.” For they had not cared for it in the days of Saul. 4 All the congregation agreed to do that, for it seemed right to all the people. 5 So David congregated all Israel, from the river of Egypt as far as Leʹbo-haʹmath, to bring the Ark of the true God from Kirʹi·ath-jeʹa·rim.6 David and all Israel went up to Baʹal·ah, to Kirʹi·ath-jeʹa·rim, which belongs to Judah, to bring up from there the Ark of the true God, Jehovah, who sits enthroned above the cherubs, where his name is called on. 7 However, they placed the Ark of the true God on a new wagon and brought it from the house of A·binʹa·dab, and Uzʹzah and A·hiʹo were leading the wagon. 8 David and all Israel were celebrating before the true God with all their might, accompanied by songs, harps, other stringed instruments, tambourines, cymbals, and trumpets. 9 But when they came to the threshing floor of Chiʹdon, Uzʹzah thrust his hand out and grabbed hold of the Ark, for the cattle nearly upset it. 10 At that Jehovah’s anger blazed against Uzʹzah, and He struck him down because he had thrust his hand out to the Ark, and he died there before God. 11 But David became angry because Jehovah’s wrath had broken through against Uzʹzah; and that place has been called Peʹrez-uzʹzah down to this day.12 So David became fearful of the true God on that day and said: “How can I bring the Ark of the true God to me?” 13 David did not bring the Ark to where he was in the City of David, but he had it taken to the house of Oʹbed-eʹdom the Gitʹtite. 14 The Ark of the true God was with the household of Oʹbed-eʹdom, remaining at his house for three months, and Jehovah kept blessing the household of Oʹbed-eʹdom and all he had.
14 King Hiʹram of Tyre sent messengers to David, along with cedar timbers, stonemasons, and woodworkers to build a house for him. 2 And David knew that Jehovah had firmly established him as king over Israel, for his kingship was highly exalted for the sake of His people Israel.3 David took more wives in Jerusalem, and David became father to more sons and daughters. 4 These are the names of the children born to him in Jerusalem: Sham·muʹa, Shoʹbab, Nathan, Solʹo·mon, 5 Ibʹhar, E·liʹshu·a, Elʹpe·let, 6 Noʹgah, Neʹpheg, Ja·phiʹa, 7 E·lishʹa·ma, Be·e·liʹa·da, and E·liphʹe·let.8 When the Phi·lisʹtines heard that David had been anointed as king over all Israel, all the Phi·lisʹtines came up to search for David. When David heard about it, he went out against them. 9 Then the Phi·lisʹtines came in and kept making raids in the Valley of Rephʹa·im. 10 David inquired of God, saying: “Should I go up against the Phi·lisʹtines? Will you give them into my hand?” At this Jehovah said to him: “Go up, and I will surely give them into your hand.” 11 So David went up to Baʹal-pe·raʹzim, and he struck them down there. At that David said: “The true God has broken through my enemies by my hand, like a breach made by waters.” That is why they named that place Baʹal-pe·raʹzim. 12 The Phi·lisʹtines abandoned their gods there, and when David gave the order, these were burned in the fire.13 Later the Phi·lisʹtines once again made a raid in the valley. 14 David again inquired of God, but the true God said to him: “Do not go directly up after them. Instead, go around behind them, and come against them in front of the baʹca bushes. 15 And when you hear the sound of marching in the tops of the baʹca bushes, launch your attack, for the true God will have gone out before you to strike down the army of the Phi·lisʹtines.” 16 So David did just as the true God commanded him, and they struck down the Phi·lisʹtine army from Gibʹe·on to Geʹzer. 17 And David’s fame spread into all the lands, and Jehovah put the dread of him upon all the nations.
15 And he continued building houses for himself in the City of David, and he prepared a place for the Ark of the true God and pitched a tent for it. 2 It was then that David said: “No one is to carry the Ark of the true God except the Levites, for Jehovah has chosen them to carry the Ark of Jehovah and to minister to him always.” 3 Then David congregated all Israel at Jerusalem to bring the Ark of Jehovah up to the place that he had prepared for it.4 David gathered the descendants of Aaron and the Levites: 5 from the Koʹhath·ites, U·riʹel the chief and 120 of his brothers; 6 from the Me·rarʹites, A·saiʹah the chief and 220 of his brothers; 7 from the Gerʹshom·ites, Joel the chief and 130 of his brothers; 8 from the descendants of E·li·zaʹphan, She·maiʹah the chief and 200 of his brothers; 9 from the descendants of Hebʹron, Eʹli·el the chief and 80 of his brothers; 10 from the descendants of Uzʹzi·el, Am·minʹa·dab the chief and 112 of his brothers. 11 Furthermore, David called the priests Zaʹdok and A·biʹa·thar and the Levites U·riʹel, A·saiʹah, Joel, She·maiʹah, Eʹli·el, and Am·minʹa·dab, 12 and he said to them: “You are the heads of the paternal houses of the Levites. Sanctify yourselves, you and your brothers, and bring the Ark of Jehovah the God of Israel up to the place that I have prepared for it. 13 Since you did not carry it the first time, the anger of Jehovah our God broke out against us, because we did not search out the proper procedure.” 14 So the priests and the Levites sanctified themselves to bring up the Ark of Jehovah the God of Israel.15 Then the Levites carried the Ark of the true God on their shoulders with the poles, just as Moses had commanded by Jehovah’s word. 16 David then told the chiefs of the Levites to appoint their brothers the singers to sing out joyfully, accompanied by musical instruments: stringed instruments, harps, and cymbals.17 So the Levites appointed Heʹman the son of Joel and, of his brothers, Aʹsaph the son of Ber·e·chiʹah and, of the Me·rarʹites their brothers, Eʹthan the son of Kush·aʹiah. 18 Together with them were their brothers of the second division, Zech·a·riʹah, Ben, Ja·aʹzi·el, She·mirʹa·moth, Je·hiʹel, Unʹni, E·liʹab, Be·naiʹah, Ma·a·seiʹah, Mat·ti·thiʹah, E·liphʹe·le·hu, and Mik·neʹiah and Oʹbed-eʹdom and Je·iʹel the gatekeepers. 19 The singers Heʹman, Aʹsaph, and Eʹthan were to play the copper cymbals; 20 and Zech·a·riʹah, Aʹzi·el, She·mirʹa·moth, Je·hiʹel, Unʹni, E·liʹab, Ma·a·seiʹah, and Be·naiʹah played stringed instruments tuned to Alʹa·moth; 21 and Mat·ti·thiʹah, E·liphʹe·le·hu, Mik·neʹiah, Oʹbed-eʹdom, Je·iʹel, and Az·a·ziʹah played harps tuned to Shemʹi·nith, to act as directors. 22 Chen·a·niʹah the chief of the Levites supervised the transport, for he was an expert, 23 and Ber·e·chiʹah and El·kaʹnah were gatekeepers for the Ark. 24 The priests Sheb·a·niʹah, Joshʹa·phat, Ne·thanʹel, A·maʹsai, Zech·a·riʹah, Be·naiʹah, and E·li·eʹzer loudly sounded the trumpets before the Ark of the true God, and Oʹbed-eʹdom and Je·hiʹah also served as gatekeepers for the Ark.25 Then David and the elders of Israel and the chiefs of the thousands were walking along to bring the ark of the covenant of Jehovah up from the house of Oʹbed-eʹdom with rejoicing. 26 When the true God helped the Levites who were carrying the ark of the covenant of Jehovah, they sacrificed seven young bulls and seven rams. 27 David was dressed in a sleeveless coat of fine fabric, as were all the Levites carrying the Ark, the singers, and Chen·a·niʹah the chief of the transport and the singers; David was also wearing a linen ephʹod. 28 All the Israelites were bringing up the ark of the covenant of Jehovah with joyful shouting, with the sound of the horn, with trumpets, with cymbals, playing loudly on stringed instruments and harps.29 But when the ark of the covenant of Jehovah came to the City of David, Saul’s daughter Miʹchal looked down through the window and saw King David skipping about and celebrating; and she began to despise him in her heart.
16 So they brought the Ark of the true God in and placed it inside the tent that David had pitched for it; and they presented burnt offerings and communion sacrifices before the true God. 2 When David finished offering up the burnt offerings and the communion sacrifices, he blessed the people in the name of Jehovah. 3 Further, he distributed to all the Israelites, to each man and woman, a round loaf of bread, a date cake, and a raisin cake. 4 Then he appointed some of the Levites to minister before the Ark of Jehovah, to honor, thank, and praise Jehovah the God of Israel. 5 Aʹsaph was the head, and second to him was Zech·a·riʹah; and Je·iʹel, She·mirʹa·moth, Je·hiʹel, Mat·ti·thiʹah, E·liʹab, Be·naiʹah, Oʹbed-eʹdom, and Je·iʹel played stringed instruments and harps; and Aʹsaph played the cymbals, 6 and Be·naiʹah and Ja·ha·ziʹel the priests blew the trumpets constantly before the ark of the covenant of the true God.7 It was on that day that David first contributed a song of thanks to Jehovah through Aʹsaph and his brothers:8 “Give thanks to Jehovah, call on his name,Make his deeds known among the peoples!9 Sing to him, sing praises to him,Ponder over all his wonderful works.10 Boast about his holy name.Let the hearts of those seeking Jehovah rejoice.11 Search for Jehovah and his strength.Seek his face constantly.12 Remember the wonderful works he has performed,His miracles and the judgments he has pronounced,13 You offspring of Israel his servant,You sons of Jacob, his chosen ones.14 He is Jehovah our God.His judgments are throughout the earth.15 Remember his covenant forever,The promise he made, to a thousand generations,16 The covenant he made with Abraham,And the oath he swore to Isaac,17 Which he established as a decree to JacobAnd as a lasting covenant to Israel,18 Saying, ‘I will give you the land of CaʹnaanAs your allotted inheritance.’19 This was when you were few in number,Yes, very few, and you were foreigners in the land.20 They walked about from nation to nation,From one kingdom to another people.21 He did not allow any man to oppress them,But on their account he reproved kings,22 Saying, ‘Do not touch my anointed ones,And to my prophets do nothing bad.’23 Sing to Jehovah, all the earth!Announce his salvation day after day!24 Declare his glory among the nations,His wonderful works among all the peoples.25 For Jehovah is great and most worthy of praise.He is more awe-inspiring than all other gods.26 All the gods of the peoples are worthless gods,But Jehovah is the one who made the heavens.27 In his presence are majesty and splendor;Strength and joy are in his dwelling place.28 Give Jehovah his due, you families of the peoples,Give Jehovah his due for his glory and strength.29 Give Jehovah the glory due his name;Bring a gift and come in before him.Bow down to Jehovah in holy adornment.30 Tremble before him, all the earth!The earth is firmly established; it cannot be moved.31 Let the heavens rejoice, and let the earth be joyful;Declare among the nations: ‘Jehovah has become King!’32 Let the sea thunder and all that fills it;Let the fields and everything in them rejoice.33 At the same time let the trees of the forest shout joyfully before Jehovah,For he is coming to judge the earth.34 Give thanks to Jehovah, for he is good;His loyal love endures forever.35 And say, ‘Save us, O God of our salvation,Gather us and rescue us from the nations,So that we may give thanks to your holy nameAnd exult in praising you.36 May Jehovah, the God of Israel, be praisedThroughout all eternity.’”And all the people said, “Amen!” and they praised Jehovah.37 Then David left Aʹsaph and his brothers there before the ark of the covenant of Jehovah to minister continually before the Ark, according to the daily routine. 38 Oʹbed-eʹdom and his brothers, numbering 68, and Oʹbed-eʹdom, the son of Je·duʹthun, and Hoʹsah were gatekeepers; 39 and Zaʹdok the priest and his fellow priests were before the tabernacle of Jehovah on the high place at Gibʹe·on 40 to offer up burnt offerings to Jehovah regularly on the altar of burnt offering, morning and evening, and to do all that is written in the Law of Jehovah that he commanded Israel. 41 With them were Heʹman and Je·duʹthun and the rest of the selected men who were designated by their names to thank Jehovah, because “his loyal love endures forever”; 42 and with them were Heʹman and Je·duʹthun to sound the trumpets, cymbals, and the instruments used to praise the true God; and the sons of Je·duʹthun were at the gate. 43 Then all the people went to their homes, and David went to bless his own household.
17 As soon as David was settled in his own house, he said to Nathan the prophet: “Here I am living in a house of cedars while the ark of the covenant of Jehovah is under tent cloths.” 2 Nathan replied to David: “Do whatever is in your heart, for the true God is with you.”3 On that very night, the word of God came to Nathan, saying: 4 “Go and say to my servant David, ‘This is what Jehovah says: “You are not the one who will build the house for me to dwell in. 5 For I have not dwelled in a house from the day I brought Israel out to this day, but I continued going from tent to tent and from one tabernacle to another. 6 During all the time that I went with all Israel, did I ever say one word to any of the judges of Israel whom I appointed to shepherd my people, saying, ‘Why did you not build a house of cedars for me?’”’7 “Now say this to my servant David, ‘This is what Jehovah of armies says: “I took you from the pastures, from following the flock, to become a leader over my people Israel. 8 And I will be with you wherever you go, and I will do away with all your enemies from before you; and I will make a name for you like the name of the great men of the earth. 9 I will appoint a place for my people Israel and settle them, and they will live there and not be disturbed anymore; and wicked men will not oppress them again as they did in the past, 10 from the day that I appointed judges over my people Israel. And I will subdue all your enemies. Moreover, I tell you, ‘Jehovah will build a house for you.’11 “‘“When your days come to an end and you go to be with your forefathers, I will raise up your offspring after you, one of your sons, and I will firmly establish his kingship. 12 He is the one who will build a house for me, and I will firmly establish his throne forever. 13 I will become his father, and he will become my son. I will not remove my loyal love from him the way I removed it from the one who was prior to you. 14 I will cause him to stand in my house and in my kingship forever, and his throne will last forever.”’”15 Nathan told David all these words and this entire vision.16 At that King David came in and sat down before Jehovah and said: “Who am I, O Jehovah God? And what is my house that you have brought me this far? 17 As if this were not enough, O God, you also speak about the house of your servant down to a distant future time, and you have looked on me as if I were a man who should be further exalted, O Jehovah God. 18 What more can your servant David say to you about the honor given me when you know your servant so well? 19 O Jehovah, for the sake of your servant and in agreement with your heart you have done all these great things by revealing your greatness. 20 O Jehovah, there is no one like you, and there is no God except you; everything we have heard with our ears confirms this. 21 And what other nation on earth is like your people Israel? The true God went and redeemed them as his people. You made a name for yourself by your great and awe-inspiring deeds, driving out nations from before your people, whom you redeemed from Egypt. 22 You made your people Israel your own people for all time; and you, O Jehovah, became their God. 23 Now, O Jehovah, may the promise you have made concerning your servant and his house prove faithful for all time, and may you do just as you have promised. 24 May your name endure and be exalted forever, so that people may say, ‘Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, is God to Israel,’ and may the house of your servant David be firmly established before you. 25 For you, my God, have revealed to your servant your purpose to build him a house. That is why your servant has the confidence to offer this prayer to you. 26 And now, O Jehovah, you are the true God, and you have promised these good things concerning your servant. 27 So may it please you to bless the house of your servant, and may it continue forever before you, for you, O Jehovah, have blessed, and it is blessed forever.”
18 Some time later, David defeated the Phi·lisʹtines and subdued them and took Gath and its dependent towns out of the hands of the Phi·lisʹtines. 2 Then he defeated Moʹab, and the Moʹab·ites became David’s servants and brought tribute.3 David defeated King Had·ad·eʹzer of Zoʹbah near Haʹmath as he was on his way to establish his authority at the Eu·phraʹtes River. 4 David captured 1,000 chariots, 7,000 horsemen, and 20,000 foot soldiers from him. Then David hamstrung all but 100 of the chariot horses. 5 When the Syrians of Damascus came to help King Had·ad·eʹzer of Zoʹbah, David struck down 22,000 of the Syrians. 6 David then established garrisons in Syria of Damascus, and the Syrians became David’s servants and brought tribute. Jehovah gave David victory wherever he went. 7 Moreover, David took the circular shields of gold from the servants of Had·ad·eʹzer and brought them to Jerusalem. 8 From Tibʹhath and Cun, cities of Had·ad·eʹzer, David took a great quantity of copper. With it Solʹo·mon made the copper Sea, the pillars, and the copper utensils.9 When King Toʹu of Haʹmath heard that David had defeated the entire army of King Had·ad·eʹzer of Zoʹbah, 10 he immediately sent his son Ha·doʹram to King David to ask about his welfare and to congratulate him because he had fought and defeated Had·ad·eʹzer (for Had·ad·eʹzer had often fought against Toʹu), and he brought all sorts of articles of gold, silver, and copper. 11 King David sanctified these to Jehovah, along with the silver and the gold that he had carried off from all the nations: from Eʹdom and Moʹab, from the Amʹmon·ites, the Phi·lisʹtines, and the A·malʹek·ites.12 A·bishʹai the son of Ze·ruʹiah struck down 18,000 Eʹdom·ites in the Valley of Salt. 13 He established garrisons in Eʹdom, and all the Eʹdom·ites became David’s servants. Jehovah gave David victory wherever he went. 14 David kept reigning over all Israel, and he was administering justice and righteousness for all his people. 15 Joʹab the son of Ze·ruʹiah was over the army, Je·hoshʹa·phat the son of A·hiʹlud was recorder, 16 Zaʹdok the son of A·hiʹtub and A·himʹe·lech the son of A·biʹa·thar were priests, and Shavʹsha was secretary. 17 Be·naiʹah the son of Je·hoiʹa·da was over the Cherʹe·thites and the Pelʹe·thites. And David’s sons were first in position next to the king.
19 Later Naʹhash the king of the Amʹmon·ites died, and his son became king in his place. 2 At that David said: “I will show loyal love toward Haʹnun the son of Naʹhash, because his father showed loyal love toward me.” So David sent messengers to offer him comfort over the loss of his father. But when David’s servants came into the land of the Amʹmon·ites to comfort Haʹnun, 3 the princes of the Amʹmon·ites said to Haʹnun: “Do you think that David is honoring your father by sending comforters to you? Is it not to make a thorough search and to overthrow you and to spy out the land that his servants have come to you?” 4 So Haʹnun took the servants of David and shaved them and cut their garments in half at their buttocks and sent them away. 5 When David was told about the men, he at once sent others to meet them, because the men had been deeply humiliated; and the king told them: “Stay in Jerʹi·cho until your beards grow back, and then return.”6 In time the Amʹmon·ites saw that they had become a stench to David, so Haʹnun and the Amʹmon·ites sent 1,000 silver talents to hire chariots and horsemen from Mes·o·po·taʹmi·a, Aʹram-maʹa·cah, and Zoʹbah. 7 Thus they hired 32,000 chariots, along with the king of Maʹa·cah and his people. Then they came and camped before Medʹe·ba. The Amʹmon·ites gathered together from their cities and came out for the battle.8 When David heard about it, he sent Joʹab and the entire army, including his mightiest warriors. 9 And the Amʹmon·ites went out and drew up in battle formation at the entrance of the city while the kings who had come were by themselves in the open field.10 When Joʹab saw that the battle charges were coming against him from the front and the rear, he chose some of the best troops in Israel and drew them up in battle formation to meet the Syrians. 11 He put the rest of the men under the command of his brother A·bishʹai, in order to draw them up in battle formation to meet the Amʹmon·ites. 12 Then he said: “If the Syrians become too strong for me, then you must come to my rescue; but if the Amʹmon·ites become too strong for you, I will rescue you. 13 We must be strong and courageous for our people and for the cities of our God, and Jehovah will do what is good in his eyes.”14 Then Joʹab and his men advanced to meet the Syrians in battle, and they fled from before him. 15 When the Amʹmon·ites saw that the Syrians had fled, they also fled from his brother A·bishʹai and went into the city. After that Joʹab came to Jerusalem.16 When the Syrians saw that they had been defeated by Israel, they sent messengers to summon the Syrians in the region of the River, with Shoʹphach the chief of the army of Had·ad·eʹzer leading them.17 When the report was made to David, he immediately gathered all Israel and crossed the Jordan and came to them and drew up in battle formation against them. David drew up in battle formation to meet the Syrians, and they fought against him. 18 But the Syrians fled from Israel; and David killed 7,000 charioteers and 40,000 foot soldiers of the Syrians, and he put Shoʹphach the chief of the army to death. 19 When the servants of Had·ad·eʹzer saw that they had been defeated by Israel, they promptly made peace with David and became his subjects; and Syria did not want to help the Amʹmon·ites anymore.
2 These were the sons of Israel: Reuʹben, Simʹe·on, Leʹvi, Judah, Isʹsa·char, Zebʹu·lun, 2 Dan, Joseph, Benjamin, Naphʹta·li, Gad, and Ashʹer.3 The sons of Judah were Er, Oʹnan, and Sheʹlah. These three were born to him from Shuʹa’s daughter, the Caʹnaan·it·ess. But Er, Judah’s firstborn, was displeasing to Jehovah, so He put him to death. 4 Taʹmar, Judah’s daughter-in-law, bore to him Peʹrez and Zeʹrah. Judah had five sons in all.5 The sons of Peʹrez were Hezʹron and Haʹmul.6 The sons of Zeʹrah were Zimʹri, Eʹthan, Heʹman, Calʹcol, and Daʹra. There were five of them in all.7 The son of Carʹmi was Aʹchar, who brought disaster on Israel, who was unfaithful with regard to what had been devoted to destruction.8 The son of Eʹthan was Az·a·riʹah.9 The sons of Hezʹron who were born to him were Je·rahʹme·el, Ram, and Che·luʹbai.10 Ram became father to Am·minʹa·dab. Am·minʹa·dab became father to Nahʹshon the chieftain of the descendants of Judah. 11 Nahʹshon became father to Salʹma. Salʹma became father to Boʹaz. 12 Boʹaz became father to Oʹbed. Oʹbed became father to Jesʹse. 13 Jesʹse became father to his firstborn E·liʹab, A·binʹa·dab the second, Shimʹe·a the third, 14 Ne·thanʹel the fourth, Radʹdai the fifth, 15 Oʹzem the sixth, and David the seventh. 16 Their sisters were Ze·ruʹiah and Abʹi·gail. The sons of Ze·ruʹiah were A·bishʹai, Joʹab, and Asʹa·hel, three. 17 Abʹi·gail gave birth to A·maʹsa, and the father of A·maʹsa was Jeʹther the Ishʹma·el·ite.18 Caʹleb the son of Hezʹron became father to sons by his wife A·zuʹbah and by Jerʹi·oth; and these were her sons: Jeʹsher, Shoʹbab, and Arʹdon. 19 When A·zuʹbah died, Caʹleb married Ephʹrath, and she bore Hur to him. 20 Hur became father to Uʹri. Uʹri became father to Bezʹal·el.21 Afterward Hezʹron had relations with the daughter of Maʹchir the father of Gilʹe·ad. He married her when he was 60 years old, and she bore Seʹgub to him. 22 Seʹgub became father to Jaʹir, who had 23 cities in the land of Gilʹe·ad. 23 Later Geshʹur and Syria took Havʹvoth-jaʹir from them, along with Keʹnath and its dependent towns, 60 cities. All of these were the descendants of Maʹchir the father of Gilʹe·ad.24 After the death of Hezʹron in Caʹleb-ephʹra·thah, A·biʹjah the wife of Hezʹron bore him Ashʹhur the father of Te·koʹa.25 The sons of Je·rahʹme·el the firstborn of Hezʹron were Ram the firstborn, Buʹnah, Oʹren, Oʹzem, and A·hiʹjah. 26 Je·rahʹme·el had another wife, whose name was Atʹa·rah. She was the mother of Oʹnam. 27 The sons of Ram the firstborn of Je·rahʹme·el were Maʹaz, Jaʹmin, and Eʹker. 28 The sons of Oʹnam were Shamʹmai and Jaʹda. The sons of Shamʹmai were Naʹdab and A·biʹshur. 29 The name of A·biʹshur’s wife was Abʹi·ha·il, who bore him Ahʹban and Moʹlid. 30 The sons of Naʹdab were Seʹled and Apʹpa·im. But Seʹled died without sons. 31 The son of Apʹpa·im was Ishʹi. And the son of Ishʹi was Sheʹshan, and the son of Sheʹshan, Ahʹlai. 32 The sons of Jaʹda the brother of Shamʹmai were Jeʹther and Jonʹa·than. But Jeʹther died without sons. 33 The sons of Jonʹa·than were Peʹleth and Zaʹza. These were the descendants of Je·rahʹme·el.34 Sheʹshan had no sons, only daughters. Now Sheʹshan had an Egyptian servant whose name was Jarʹha. 35 Sheʹshan gave his daughter to be the wife of his servant Jarʹha, and she bore him Atʹtai. 36 Atʹtai became father to Nathan. Nathan became father to Zaʹbad. 37 Zaʹbad became father to Ephʹlal. Ephʹlal became father to Oʹbed. 38 Oʹbed became father to Jeʹhu. Jeʹhu became father to Az·a·riʹah. 39 Az·a·riʹah became father to Heʹlez. Heʹlez became father to El·e·aʹsah. 40 El·e·aʹsah became father to Sisʹmai. Sisʹmai became father to Shalʹlum. 41 Shalʹlum became father to Jek·a·miʹah. Jek·a·miʹah became father to E·lishʹa·ma.42 The sons of Caʹleb the brother of Je·rahʹme·el were Meʹsha his firstborn, who was the father of Ziph, and the sons of Ma·reʹshah the father of Hebʹron. 43 The sons of Hebʹron were Korʹah, Tapʹpu·ah, Reʹkem, and Sheʹma. 44 Sheʹma became father to Raʹham the father of Jorʹke·am. Reʹkem became father to Shamʹmai. 45 The son of Shamʹmai was Maʹon. Maʹon was the father of Beth-zur. 46 Caʹleb’s concubine Eʹphah gave birth to Haʹran, Moʹza, and Gaʹzez. Haʹran became father to Gaʹzez. 47 The sons of Jahʹdai were Reʹgem, Joʹtham, Geʹshan, Pelʹet, Eʹphah, and Shaʹaph. 48 Caʹleb’s concubine Maʹa·cah gave birth to Sheʹber and Tirʹha·nah. 49 In time she bore Shaʹaph the father of Mad·manʹnah and Sheʹva the father of Mach·beʹnah and Gibʹe·a. Caʹleb’s daughter was Achʹsah. 50 These were the descendants of Caʹleb.The sons of Hur the firstborn of Ephʹra·thah were Shoʹbal the father of Kirʹi·ath-jeʹa·rim, 51 Salʹma the father of Bethʹle·hem, and Haʹreph the father of Beth-gaʹder. 52 Shoʹbal the father of Kirʹi·ath-jeʹa·rim had sons: Ha·roʹeh and half of the Me·nuʹhoth. 53 The families of Kirʹi·ath-jeʹa·rim were the Ithʹrites, the Puʹthites, the Shuʹmath·ites, and the Mishʹra·ites. It was from these that the Zoʹrath·ites and the Eshʹta·ol·ites came. 54 The sons of Salʹma were Bethʹle·hem, the Ne·tophʹa·thites, Atʹroth-beth-joʹab, half of the Man·a·haʹthites, and the Zorʹites. 55 The families of the scribes dwelling at Jaʹbez were the Tiʹrath·ites, the Shimʹe·ath·ites, and the Suʹcath·ites. These were the Kenʹites who came from Hamʹmath the father of the house of Reʹchab.
20 At the start of the year, at the time when kings go on campaigns, Joʹab led a military expedition and devastated the land of the Amʹmon·ites; he came and besieged Rabʹbah, while David stayed in Jerusalem. Joʹab attacked Rabʹbah and tore it down. 2 Then David took the crown of Malʹcam from its head, and found that it weighed a talent of gold, and in it there were precious stones; and it was placed on David’s head. He also took a vast amount of spoil from the city. 3 And he brought out the people who were in it and put them to work at sawing stones and at working with sharp iron instruments and with axes. That was what David did to all the cities of the Amʹmon·ites. Finally David and all the troops returned to Jerusalem.4 After this, war broke out at Geʹzer with the Phi·lisʹtines. At that time Sibʹbe·cai the Huʹshath·ite struck down Sipʹpai, who was a descendant of the Rephʹa·im, and they were subdued.5 And there was war again with the Phi·lisʹtines, and El·haʹnan the son of Jaʹir struck down Lahʹmi the brother of Go·liʹath the Gitʹtite, whose spear had a shaft like the beam of loom workers.6 War broke out yet again at Gath, where there was a man of extraordinary size, with 6 fingers on each hand and 6 toes on each foot, 24 in all; and he too was a descendant of the Rephʹa·im. 7 He kept taunting Israel. So Jonʹa·than the son of Shimʹe·a, David’s brother, struck him down.8 These were descendants of the Rephʹa·im in Gath, and they fell by the hand of David and by the hand of his servants.
21 Then Satan stood up against Israel and incited David to number Israel. 2 So David said to Joʹab and the chiefs of the people: “Go, count Israel from Beʹer-sheʹba to Dan; then report to me so that I may know their number.” 3 But Joʹab said: “May Jehovah multiply his people 100 times! My lord the king, are not all of them already servants of my lord? Why does my lord want to do this? Why should he become a cause of guilt to Israel?”4 But the king’s word prevailed over Joʹab. So Joʹab went out and traveled throughout Israel, after which he came to Jerusalem. 5 Joʹab now gave to David the number of the people who were registered. All Israel amounted to 1,100,000 men armed with swords, and Judah, 470,000 men armed with swords. 6 But Leʹvi and Benjamin were not registered among them, because the king’s word was detestable to Joʹab.7 Now this was very displeasing to the true God, so he struck Israel. 8 David then said to the true God: “I have sinned greatly by doing this. And now, please, forgive your servant’s error, for I have acted very foolishly.” 9 Jehovah then spoke to Gad, David’s visionary, saying: 10 “Go and say to David, ‘This is what Jehovah says: “I am giving you three options. Choose the one that I should bring on you.”’” 11 So Gad came in to David and said to him: “This is what Jehovah says, ‘Take your pick 12 whether there should be three years of famine, or three months of being swept away by your adversaries while the sword of your enemies overtakes you, or three days of the sword of Jehovah—pestilence in the land—with Jehovah’s angel bringing destruction in all the territory of Israel.’ Now consider what I should reply to the One who sent me.” 13 So David said to Gad: “It is very distressing to me. Please, let me fall into the hand of Jehovah, for his mercy is very great; but do not let me fall into the hand of man.”14 Then Jehovah sent a pestilence on Israel, so that 70,000 people out of Israel fell. 15 Moreover, the true God sent an angel to Jerusalem to destroy it; but as he was about to do so, Jehovah saw it and felt regret over the calamity, and he said to the angel bringing destruction: “It is enough! Now let your hand drop.” Jehovah’s angel was standing close to the threshing floor of Orʹnan the Jebʹu·site.16 When David raised his eyes, he saw Jehovah’s angel standing between the earth and the heavens with a drawn sword in his hand extended toward Jerusalem. David and the elders, covered with sackcloth, at once threw themselves down with their faces to the ground. 17 David said to the true God: “Was it not I who said to number the people? I am the one who sinned, and I am the one who did wrong; but these sheep—what have they done? O Jehovah my God, let your hand, please, come against me and my father’s house; but do not bring this scourge on your people.”18 Jehovah’s angel then told Gad to tell David to go up and erect an altar to Jehovah on the threshing floor of Orʹnan the Jebʹu·site. 19 So David went up at the word of Gad, which he had spoken in the name of Jehovah. 20 Meanwhile, Orʹnan turned around and saw the angel, and his four sons who were with him hid themselves. Now Orʹnan had been threshing wheat. 21 When David came up to him, Orʹnan looked and saw David, and he immediately went out from the threshing floor and bowed down to David with his face to the ground. 22 David said to Orʹnan: “Sell me the site of the threshing floor, so that I may build an altar to Jehovah on it. Sell it to me for the full price, so that the scourge against the people may be halted.” 23 But Orʹnan said to David: “Take it as your own, and let my lord the king do what seems good to him. Here, I am providing the cattle for burnt offerings and the threshing sledge for the wood and the wheat as a grain offering. I give all of it.”24 However, King David said to Orʹnan: “No, I must buy it for the full price, because I will not take what is yours and give it to Jehovah or offer up burnt sacrifices that cost me nothing.” 25 So David gave Orʹnan 600 gold shekels by weight for the site. 26 And David built an altar there to Jehovah and offered up burnt sacrifices and communion sacrifices, and he called on Jehovah, who now answered him with fire from the heavens on the altar of burnt offering. 27 Then Jehovah ordered the angel to return his sword to its sheath. 28 At that time, when David saw that Jehovah had answered him at the threshing floor of Orʹnan the Jebʹu·site, he continued to sacrifice there. 29 However, the tabernacle of Jehovah that Moses had made in the wilderness and the altar of burnt offering were at that time on the high place at Gibʹe·on. 30 But David had not been able to go before it to consult God, for he was terrified because of the sword of Jehovah’s angel.
22 David then said: “This is the house of Jehovah the true God, and this is an altar for burnt offering for Israel.”2 David then gave orders to bring together the foreign residents who were in the land of Israel, and he assigned them to be stonecutters to cut and shape stones for building the house of the true God. 3 David also prepared iron in great quantity for nails for the doors of the gates and for clamps, and so much copper that it was beyond weighing, 4 and also cedar timbers without number, for the Si·doʹni·ans and the Tyrʹi·ans brought great quantities of cedar timbers to David. 5 And David said: “My son Solʹo·mon is young and inexperienced, and the house to be built for Jehovah is to be exceedingly magnificent, so that its fame and beauty will be known in all lands. Therefore, I will make preparation for him.” So David prepared materials in great quantity before his death.6 Moreover, he summoned his son Solʹo·mon and instructed him to build a house for Jehovah the God of Israel. 7 David told his son Solʹo·mon: “As for me, it was my heart’s desire to build a house for the name of Jehovah my God. 8 But Jehovah’s word came to me, saying, ‘You have shed a great deal of blood, and you have fought great wars. You will not build a house for my name, for you have shed a great deal of blood on the earth before me. 9 Look! You will have a son who will be a man of peace, and I will give him rest from all his enemies who surround him, for Solʹo·mon will be his name and I will grant Israel peace and quiet in his days. 10 He is the one who will build a house for my name. He will become my son, and I will be his father. I will firmly establish the throne of his kingship over Israel forever.’11 “Now, my son, may Jehovah be with you, and may you be successful and build the house of Jehovah your God, just as he has spoken concerning you. 12 Only may Jehovah give you discretion and understanding when he gives you authority over Israel, so that you may keep the law of Jehovah your God. 13 Then you will be successful if you carefully observe the regulations and the judgments that Jehovah ordered Moses to give Israel. Be courageous and strong. Do not be afraid or be terrified. 14 Here I have taken great pains to prepare for Jehovah’s house 100,000 talents of gold and 1,000,000 talents of silver and such great quantities of copper and iron that they cannot be weighed, and I have prepared timbers and stones, but you will add to them. 15 A great number of workmen are with you—stonecutters, stonemasons, woodworkers, and all kinds of skilled workers. 16 The gold, silver, copper, and iron are beyond measure. Get up and begin the work, and may Jehovah be with you.”17 David then ordered all the princes of Israel to help his son Solʹo·mon: 18 “Is not Jehovah your God with you, and has he not given you rest on every side? For he handed over to me the inhabitants of the land, and the land has been subdued before Jehovah and before his people. 19 Now determine with all your heart and soul to seek Jehovah your God, and start building the sanctuary of Jehovah the true God, in order to bring the ark of the covenant of Jehovah and the holy utensils of the true God to the house built for the name of Jehovah.”
23 When David had grown old and was near the end of his life, he made his son Solʹo·mon king over Israel. 2 He then gathered all the princes of Israel, the priests, and the Levites. 3 The Levites who were 30 years old and up were numbered; their number, their head count man by man, was 38,000. 4 Of these, 24,000 served as supervisors over the work of Jehovah’s house, and there were 6,000 officers and judges, 5 and there were 4,000 gatekeepers, and 4,000 gave praise to Jehovah on the instruments about which David said, “I made them for giving praise.”6 Then David organized them into divisions according to the sons of Leʹvi: Gerʹshon, Koʹhath, and Me·rarʹi. 7 Of the Gerʹshon·ites were Laʹdan and Shimʹe·i. 8 The sons of Laʹdan were Je·hiʹel the headman, Zeʹtham, and Joel, three. 9 The sons of Shimʹe·i were She·loʹmoth, Haʹzi·el, and Haʹran, three. These were the heads of the paternal houses for Laʹdan. 10 And the sons of Shimʹe·i were Jaʹhath, Ziʹna, Jeʹush, and Be·riʹah. These four were the sons of Shimʹe·i. 11 Jaʹhath was the head and Ziʹzah, the second. But since Jeʹush and Be·riʹah did not have many sons, they were counted as one paternal house with one area of responsibility.12 The sons of Koʹhath were Amʹram, Izʹhar, Hebʹron, and Uzʹzi·el, four. 13 The sons of Amʹram were Aaron and Moses. But Aaron was permanently set apart to sanctify the Most Holy, he and his sons, to offer sacrifices before Jehovah, to minister to him, and to pronounce blessings in his name always. 14 As for Moses the man of the true God, his sons were named among the tribe of the Levites. 15 The sons of Moses were Gerʹshom and E·li·eʹzer. 16 Of the sons of Gerʹshom, Shebʹu·el was the head. 17 Of the descendants of E·li·eʹzer, Re·ha·biʹah was the head; E·li·eʹzer did not have other sons, but the sons of Re·ha·biʹah were very many. 18 Of the sons of Izʹhar, She·loʹmith was the headman. 19 The sons of Hebʹron were Je·riʹah the head, Am·a·riʹah the second, Ja·ha·ziʹel the third, and Jek·a·meʹam the fourth. 20 The sons of Uzʹzi·el were Miʹcah the head and Is·shiʹah the second.21 The sons of Me·rarʹi were Mahʹli and Muʹshi. The sons of Mahʹli were El·e·aʹzar and Kish. 22 El·e·aʹzar died, but he had no sons, only daughters. So the sons of Kish, their relatives, took them as wives. 23 The sons of Muʹshi were Mahʹli, Eʹder, and Jerʹe·moth, three.24 These were the sons of Leʹvi according to their paternal houses, the heads of the paternal houses, by those registered who were counted and listed by their names and who carried out the work for the service of the house of Jehovah, from 20 years old and up. 25 For David had said: “Jehovah the God of Israel has given rest to his people, and he will reside in Jerusalem forever. 26 Also the Levites will not have to carry the tabernacle or any of its utensils for its service.” 27 For according to the last instructions of David, the Levites from 20 years old and up were numbered. 28 Their function was to assist the sons of Aaron for the service of the house of Jehovah, to be in charge of the courtyards, the dining rooms, the purification of every holy thing, and any work needed for the service of the house of the true God. 29 They assisted with the layer bread, the fine flour for the grain offering, the wafers of unleavened bread, the griddle cakes, the mixed dough, and all measures of quantity and size. 30 They were to stand morning by morning to thank and praise Jehovah and likewise in the evening. 31 They assisted whenever the burnt sacrifices were offered to Jehovah on the Sabbaths, the new moons, and during the festival seasons, according to the number required by the rules concerning them, doing so regularly before Jehovah. 32 They also took care of their responsibilities toward the tent of meeting, toward the holy place, and toward their brothers the sons of Aaron for the service of the house of Jehovah.
24 Now the divisions of the descendants of Aaron were these: The sons of Aaron were Naʹdab, A·biʹhu, El·e·aʹzar, and Ithʹa·mar. 2 However, Naʹdab and A·biʹhu died before their father, and they did not have any sons; but El·e·aʹzar and Ithʹa·mar continued to serve as priests. 3 David, along with Zaʹdok from the sons of El·e·aʹzar and A·himʹe·lech from the sons of Ithʹa·mar, made divisions of them for the office of their service. 4 Since the sons of El·e·aʹzar had more headmen than the sons of Ithʹa·mar had, they divided them accordingly: The sons of El·e·aʹzar had 16 as heads of their paternal houses, and the sons of Ithʹa·mar had 8 as heads of their paternal houses.5 Further, they divided them by lots, the one group along with the other, for there were chiefs of the holy place and chiefs of the true God from both the sons of El·e·aʹzar and the sons of Ithʹa·mar. 6 Then She·maiʹah the son of Ne·thanʹel the secretary of the Levites recorded their names before the king, the princes, Zaʹdok the priest, A·himʹe·lech the son of A·biʹa·thar, and the heads of the paternal houses of the priests and of the Levites, one paternal house being selected for El·e·aʹzar and one being selected for Ithʹa·mar.7 The first lot came out to Je·hoiʹa·rib; the second to Je·daʹiah, 8 the third to Haʹrim, the fourth to Se·oʹrim, 9 the fifth to Mal·chiʹjah, the sixth to Mijʹa·min, 10 the seventh to Hakʹkoz, the eighth to A·biʹjah, 11 the ninth to Jeshʹu·a, the tenth to Shec·a·niʹah, 12 the 11th to E·liʹa·shib, the 12th to Jaʹkim, 13 the 13th to Hupʹpah, the 14th to Je·shebʹe·ab, 14 the 15th to Bilʹgah, the 16th to Imʹmer, 15 the 17th to Heʹzir, the 18th to Hapʹpiz·zez, 16 the 19th to Peth·a·hiʹah, the 20th to Je·hezʹkel, 17 the 21st to Jaʹchin, the 22nd to Gaʹmul, 18 the 23rd to De·laʹiah, the 24th to Ma·a·ziʹah.19 These were their offices for their service when they would come into the house of Jehovah according to the procedure set by their forefather Aaron, just as Jehovah the God of Israel had commanded him.20 And of the rest of the Levites: of the sons of Amʹram, there was Shuʹba·el; of the sons of Shuʹba·el, Jeh·deʹiah; 21 of Re·ha·biʹah: of the sons of Re·ha·biʹah, Is·shiʹah the head; 22 of the Izʹhar·ites, She·loʹmoth; of the sons of She·loʹmoth, Jaʹhath; 23 and of the sons of Hebʹron, Je·riʹah the head, Am·a·riʹah the second, Ja·ha·ziʹel the third, Jek·a·meʹam the fourth; 24 of the sons of Uzʹzi·el, Miʹcah; of the sons of Miʹcah, Shaʹmir. 25 The brother of Miʹcah was Is·shiʹah; of the sons of Is·shiʹah, Zech·a·riʹah.26 The sons of Me·rarʹi were Mahʹli and Muʹshi; of the sons of Ja·a·ziʹah, Beʹno. 27 The sons of Me·rarʹi: of Ja·a·ziʹah, Beʹno, Shoʹham, Zacʹcur, and Ibʹri; 28 of Mahʹli, El·e·aʹzar, who did not have any sons; 29 of Kish: the sons of Kish, Je·rahʹme·el; 30 and the sons of Muʹshi were Mahʹli, Eʹder, and Jerʹi·moth.These were the sons of Leʹvi by their paternal houses. 31 And they also cast lots just as their brothers the sons of Aaron did in the presence of King David, Zaʹdok, A·himʹe·lech, and the heads of the paternal houses of the priests and of the Levites. Regarding the paternal houses, the head one was just as his younger brother.
25 Further, David and the chiefs of the groups for the service separated some of the sons of Aʹsaph, Heʹman, and Je·duʹthun to serve by prophesying with the harps, the stringed instruments, and the cymbals. The list of the official men for this service was, 2 of the sons of Aʹsaph: Zacʹcur, Joseph, Neth·a·niʹah, and Ash·a·reʹlah, the sons of Aʹsaph under the direction of Aʹsaph, who prophesied under the direction of the king. 3 Of Je·duʹthun, the sons of Je·duʹthun: Ged·a·liʹah, Zeʹri, Je·shaʹiah, Shimʹe·i, Hash·a·biʹah, and Mat·ti·thiʹah, six, under the direction of their father Je·duʹthun, who prophesied with the harp, thanking and praising Jehovah. 4 Of Heʹman, the sons of Heʹman: Buk·kiʹah, Mat·ta·niʹah, Uzʹzi·el, Shebʹu·el, Jerʹi·moth, Han·a·niʹah, Ha·naʹni, E·liʹa·thah, Gid·dalʹti, Ro·mamʹti-eʹzer, Josh·be·kashʹah, Mal·loʹthi, Hoʹthir, and Ma·haʹzi·oth. 5 All of these were sons of Heʹman, a visionary of the king in matters pertaining to the true God to his glory; thus the true God gave Heʹman 14 sons and 3 daughters. 6 All of these were under the direction of their father for singing at the house of Jehovah, with cymbals, stringed instruments, and harps for the service of the house of the true God.Under the king’s direction were Aʹsaph, Je·duʹthun, and Heʹman.7 The number of them and their brothers who were trained in song to Jehovah, all experts, was 288. 8 So they cast lots for their duties, the small and the great alike, the expert along with the learner.9 The first lot to come out belonged to Aʹsaph for Joseph, the second for Ged·a·liʹah (he and his brothers and his sons were 12); 10 the third for Zacʹcur, his sons and his brothers, 12; 11 the fourth for Izʹri, his sons and his brothers, 12; 12 the fifth for Neth·a·niʹah, his sons and his brothers, 12; 13 the sixth for Buk·kiʹah, his sons and his brothers, 12; 14 the seventh for Jesh·a·reʹlah, his sons and his brothers, 12; 15 the eighth for Je·shaʹiah, his sons and his brothers, 12; 16 the ninth for Mat·ta·niʹah, his sons and his brothers, 12; 17 the tenth for Shimʹe·i, his sons and his brothers, 12; 18 the 11th for Azʹar·el, his sons and his brothers, 12; 19 the 12th for Hash·a·biʹah, his sons and his brothers, 12; 20 for the 13th, Shuʹba·el, his sons and his brothers, 12; 21 for the 14th, Mat·ti·thiʹah, his sons and his brothers, 12; 22 for the 15th, for Jerʹe·moth, his sons and his brothers, 12; 23 for the 16th, for Han·a·niʹah, his sons and his brothers, 12; 24 for the 17th, for Josh·be·kashʹah, his sons and his brothers, 12; 25 for the 18th, for Ha·naʹni, his sons and his brothers, 12; 26 for the 19th, for Mal·loʹthi, his sons and his brothers, 12; 27 for the 20th, for E·liʹa·thah, his sons and his brothers, 12; 28 for the 21st, for Hoʹthir, his sons and his brothers, 12; 29 for the 22nd, for Gid·dalʹti, his sons and his brothers, 12; 30 for the 23rd, for Ma·haʹzi·oth, his sons and his brothers, 12; 31 for the 24th, for Ro·mamʹti-eʹzer, his sons and his brothers, 12.
26 The divisions of gatekeepers were as follows: of the Korʹah·ites, Me·shel·e·miʹah the son of Koʹre of the sons of Aʹsaph. 2 And Me·shel·e·miʹah had sons: Zech·a·riʹah the firstborn, Je·diʹa·el the second, Zeb·a·diʹah the third, Jathʹni·el the fourth, 3 Eʹlam the fifth, Je·ho·haʹnan the sixth, Elʹie·ho-eʹnai the seventh. 4 And Oʹbed-eʹdom had sons: She·maiʹah the firstborn, Je·hozʹa·bad the second, Joʹah the third, Saʹcar the fourth, Ne·thanʹel the fifth, 5 Amʹmi·el the sixth, Isʹsa·char the seventh, and Pe·ulʹle·thai the eighth; for God had blessed him.6 And to his son She·maiʹah, there were sons born who were rulers of their paternal house, for they were mighty, capable men. 7 The sons of She·maiʹah: Othʹni, Rephʹa·el, Oʹbed, and El·zaʹbad; and his brothers E·liʹhu and Sem·a·chiʹah were also capable men. 8 All of these were of the sons of Oʹbed-eʹdom; they and their sons and their brothers were capable men and qualified for the service, 62 belonging to Oʹbed-eʹdom. 9 And Me·shel·e·miʹah had sons and brothers, 18 capable men. 10 And Hoʹsah of the sons of Me·rarʹi had sons. Shimʹri was the head, for although he was not the firstborn, his father appointed him as head, 11 Hil·kiʹah the second, Teb·a·liʹah the third, Zech·a·riʹah the fourth. All the sons and brothers of Hoʹsah were 13.12 Of these divisions of the gatekeepers, the headmen had duties just as their brothers did, to minister at the house of Jehovah. 13 So they cast lots, the small and the great alike by their paternal houses, for the different gates. 14 Then the lot to the east fell to Shel·e·miʹah. For Zech·a·riʹah his son, a discreet adviser, they cast the lots, and his lot came out to the north. 15 Oʹbed-eʹdom had his to the south, and his sons were assigned the storehouses. 16 Shupʹpim and Hoʹsah had theirs to the west, near the Shalʹlech·eth Gate by the highway that goes up, guard group corresponding to guard group; 17 there were six Levites to the east; to the north, four each day and to the south, four each day; and for the storehouses, two by two; 18 for the portico to the west, there were four at the highway and two at the portico. 19 These were the divisions of the gatekeepers from the sons of the Korʹah·ites and of the Me·rarʹites.20 As regards the Levites, A·hiʹjah was in charge of the treasuries of the house of the true God and the treasuries of the things made holy. 21 The sons of Laʹdan: the sons of the Gerʹshon·ite belonging to Laʹdan, the heads of the paternal houses belonging to Laʹdan the Gerʹshon·ite, Je·hiʹe·li 22 and the sons of Je·hiʹe·li, Zeʹtham and his brother Joel. They were in charge of the treasuries of the house of Jehovah. 23 From the Amʹram·ites, the Izʹhar·ites, the Hebʹron·ites, and the Uz·ziʹel·ites, 24 Shebʹu·el son of Gerʹshom son of Moses was a leader in charge of the storehouses. 25 As regards his brothers, of E·li·eʹzer, there was Re·ha·biʹah his son, Je·shaʹiah his son, Joʹram his son, Zichʹri his son, and She·loʹmoth his son. 26 This She·loʹmoth and his brothers were in charge of all the treasuries of the things made holy, which King David, the heads of the paternal houses, the chiefs of the thousands and of the hundreds, and the chiefs of the army had made holy. 27 From the wars and from the spoil, they had made things holy to maintain the house of Jehovah; 28 also, all that Samuel the seer, Saul the son of Kish, Abʹner the son of Ner, and Joʹab the son of Ze·ruʹiah had made holy. Whatever anyone made holy was put in the care of She·loʹmith and his brothers.29 Of the Izʹhar·ites, Chen·a·niʹah and his sons were assigned outside administrative duties as officers and as judges over Israel.30 Of the Hebʹron·ites, Hash·a·biʹah and his brothers, 1,700 capable men, were over the administration of Israel in the region west of the Jordan for all the work of Jehovah and for the king’s service. 31 Of the Hebʹron·ites, Je·riʹjah was the head of the Hebʹron·ites by line of descent of their paternal house. In the 40th year of David’s kingship, they were sought out, and mighty, capable men were found among them in Jaʹzer in Gilʹe·ad. 32 And his brothers numbered 2,700 capable men, heads of the paternal houses. So King David assigned them over the Reuʹben·ites, the Gadʹites, and the half tribe of the Ma·nasʹsites, for every matter of the true God and matter of the king.
27 This is the number of Israelites, the heads of the paternal houses, the chiefs of the thousands and of the hundreds, and their officers who ministered to the king in every matter of the divisions that would come in and go out month by month during all the months of the year; there were 24,000 in each division.2 Over the first division of the first month was Ja·shoʹbe·am the son of Zabʹdi·el, and 24,000 were in his division. 3 Of the sons of Peʹrez, he was the head of all the chiefs of the groups assigned to serve during the first month. 4 Over the division of the second month was Doʹdai the A·hoʹhite with his division, and Mikʹloth was the leader, and 24,000 were in his division. 5 The chief of the third group assigned to serve during the third month was Be·naiʹah the son of Je·hoiʹa·da the chief priest, and 24,000 were in his division. 6 This Be·naiʹah was a mighty warrior of the thirty and in charge of the thirty, and over his division was his son Am·mizʹa·bad. 7 The fourth for the fourth month was Asʹa·hel, Joʹab’s brother, and his son Zeb·a·diʹah after him, and 24,000 were in his division. 8 The fifth chief for the fifth month was Shamʹhuth the Izʹrah·ite, and 24,000 were in his division. 9 The sixth for the sixth month was Iʹra the son of Ikʹkesh the Te·koʹite, and 24,000 were in his division. 10 The seventh for the seventh month was Heʹlez the Pelʹo·nite of the Eʹphra·im·ites, and 24,000 were in his division. 11 The eighth for the eighth month was Sibʹbe·cai the Huʹshath·ite of the Zeʹrah·ites, and 24,000 were in his division. 12 The ninth for the ninth month was Abi-eʹzer the Anʹa·thoth·ite of the Benʹja·min·ites, and 24,000 were in his division. 13 The tenth for the tenth month was Maʹha·rai the Ne·tophʹa·thite of the Zeʹrah·ites, and 24,000 were in his division. 14 The 11th for the 11th month was Be·naiʹah the Pirʹa·thon·ite of the sons of Eʹphra·im, and 24,000 were in his division. 15 The 12th for the 12th month was Helʹdai the Ne·tophʹa·thite, of Othʹni·el, and 24,000 were in his division.16 These were the leaders of the tribes of Israel: Of the Reuʹben·ites, E·li·eʹzer the son of Zichʹri was leader; of the Simʹe·on·ites, Sheph·a·tiʹah the son of Maʹa·cah; 17 of Leʹvi, Hash·a·biʹah the son of Kem·uʹel; of Aaron, Zaʹdok; 18 of Judah, E·liʹhu, one of David’s brothers; of Isʹsa·char, Omʹri the son of Miʹcha·el; 19 of Zebʹu·lun, Ish·maʹiah the son of O·ba·diʹah; of Naphʹta·li, Jerʹi·moth the son of Azʹri·el; 20 of the Eʹphra·im·ites, Ho·sheʹa the son of Az·a·ziʹah; of the half tribe of Ma·nasʹseh, Joel the son of Pe·daiʹah; 21 of the half tribe of Ma·nasʹseh in Gilʹe·ad, Idʹdo the son of Zech·a·riʹah; of Benjamin, Ja·a·siʹel the son of Abʹner; 22 of Dan, Azʹar·el the son of Je·roʹham. These were the princes of the tribes of Israel.23 David did not count those 20 years of age and under, because Jehovah had promised to make Israel as many as the stars of the heavens. 24 Joʹab the son of Ze·ruʹiah had started to take the count, but he did not finish; and God’s anger came against Israel because of this, and the number was not entered into the account of the history of the times of King David.25 Over the treasuries of the king was Azʹma·veth the son of Adʹi·el. Jonʹa·than the son of Uz·ziʹah was over the storehouses in the fields, in the cities, in the villages, and in the towers. 26 Over the field workers who cultivated the soil was Ezʹri the son of Cheʹlub. 27 Shimʹe·i the Raʹmath·ite was over the vineyards; over the produce of the vineyards for the wine supplies was Zabʹdi the Shiphʹmite. 28 Over the olive groves and the sycamore trees in the She·pheʹlah was Baʹal-haʹnan the Ge·deʹrite; over the oil supplies was Joʹash. 29 Over the herds that grazed in Sharʹon was Shitʹrai the Sharʹon·ite, and Shaʹphat the son of Adʹlai was over the herds in the valley plains. 30 Over the camels was Oʹbil the Ishʹma·el·ite; over the donkeys was Jeh·deʹiah the Me·ronʹo·thite. 31 Over the flocks was Jaʹziz the Hagʹrite. All of these were the chiefs of King David’s property.32 Jonʹa·than, David’s nephew, was an adviser, a man of understanding and a secretary, and Je·hiʹel the son of Hachʹmo·ni looked after the king’s sons. 33 A·hithʹo·phel was an adviser to the king, and Huʹshai the Arʹchite was the king’s friend. 34 After A·hithʹo·phel there were Je·hoiʹa·da the son of Be·naiʹah and A·biʹa·thar; and Joʹab was chief of the king’s army.
28 David then congregated all the princes of Israel to Jerusalem: the princes of the tribes, the chiefs of the divisions ministering to the king, the chiefs of thousands and the chiefs of hundreds, the chiefs of all the property and livestock of the king and of his sons, together with the court officials and every mighty and capable man. 2 Then King David rose to his feet and said:“Hear me, my brothers and my people. It was my heart’s desire to build a house as the resting-place for the ark of the covenant of Jehovah and as the footstool of our God, and I made preparations to build. 3 But the true God told me, ‘You will not build a house for my name, for you are a man of wars, and you have shed blood.’ 4 However, Jehovah the God of Israel chose me out of all the house of my father to become king over Israel forever, for he chose Judah as leader and of the house of Judah, my father’s house, and of my father’s sons, I was the one whom he approved, to make me king over all Israel. 5 And of all my sons—for Jehovah has given me many sons—he chose my son Solʹo·mon to sit on the throne of the kingship of Jehovah over Israel.6 “He said to me, ‘Your son Solʹo·mon is the one who will build my house and my courtyards, for I have chosen him as my son and I will become his father. 7 I will firmly establish his kingship forever if he resolutely observes my commandments and my judicial decisions, as he is now doing.’ 8 So I say before the eyes of all Israel, Jehovah’s congregation, and in the ears of our God: Carefully observe and search for all the commandments of Jehovah your God, so that you may possess the good land and pass it on as a permanent inheritance to your sons after you.9 “And you, Solʹo·mon my son, know the God of your father and serve him with a complete heart and with a delightful soul, for Jehovah searches through all hearts, and he discerns every inclination of the thoughts. If you search for him, he will let himself be found by you, but if you leave him, he will reject you forever. 10 See, now, for Jehovah has chosen you to build a house as a sanctuary. Be courageous and go to work.”11 David then gave to his son Solʹo·mon the architectural plan of the porch and of its houses, its storerooms, its roof chambers, its inner rooms, and the house of the propitiatory cover. 12 He gave him the architectural plan of everything that had been conveyed to him through inspiration for the courtyards of Jehovah’s house, for all the dining rooms around it, for the treasuries of the house of the true God, and for the treasuries of the things made holy; 13 also for the divisions of the priests and of the Levites, for all the duties of the service of Jehovah’s house, and for all the utensils of the service of Jehovah’s house; 14 also for the weight of the gold, the gold for all the utensils for the different services, the weight of all the utensils of silver, and for all the utensils for the different services; 15 also the weight for the gold lampstands and their gold lamps, the weight of the different lampstands and their lamps, and the weight of the silver lampstands, for each lampstand and its lamps according to its use; 16 also the weight of the gold for the tables of the layer bread, for each table, as well as the silver for the tables of silver, 17 for the forks, the bowls, the pitchers of pure gold, and the weight of the small gold bowls, for each small bowl, and the weight of the small silver bowls, for each small bowl. 18 He also gave the weight for the refined gold for the incense altar and for the representation of the chariot, namely, the cherubs of gold that spread their wings out and overshadow the ark of the covenant of Jehovah. 19 David said: “The hand of Jehovah was upon me, and he gave me insight to put all the details of the architectural plan in writing.”20 Then David said to his son Solʹo·mon: “Be courageous and strong and go to work. Do not be afraid or be terrified, for Jehovah God, my God, is with you. He will not desert you or abandon you, but he will be with you until all the work for the service of Jehovah’s house is finished. 21 And here are the divisions of the priests and of the Levites for all the service of the house of the true God. You have willing, skilled workers to perform every kind of service, as well as the princes and all the people who will carry out all your instructions.”
29 King David now said to all the congregation: “My son Solʹo·mon, the one whom God has chosen, is young and inexperienced, and the work is great, for it is not a temple for man but for Jehovah God. 2 And I have spared no effort to prepare for the house of my God, providing the gold for the goldwork, the silver for the silverwork, the copper for the copperwork, the iron for the ironwork, the timbers for the timberwork, onyx stones, and stones to be set with mortar, mosaic pebbles, every kind of precious stone, and alabaster stones in great quantity. 3 Moreover, because of my delight in the house of my God, there is also my private treasure of gold and silver that I am giving to the house of my God, in addition to all that I have prepared for the holy house, 4 including 3,000 talents of gold from Oʹphir and 7,000 talents of refined silver, for coating the walls of the houses, 5 the gold for the goldwork and the silver for the silverwork, and for all the work to be done by the craftsmen. Now who volunteers to come forward today with a gift in hand for Jehovah?”6 So the princes of the paternal houses, the princes of the tribes of Israel, the chiefs of thousands and of hundreds, and the chiefs of the business of the king came forward voluntarily. 7 And they gave to the service of the house of the true God: 5,000 talents of gold, 10,000 darics, 10,000 talents of silver, 18,000 talents of copper, and 100,000 talents of iron. 8 Whoever had precious stones gave them to the treasury of the house of Jehovah, under the care of Je·hiʹel the Gerʹshon·ite. 9 The people rejoiced over making these voluntary offerings, for they made the voluntary offerings to Jehovah with a complete heart, and David the king also rejoiced greatly.10 Then David praised Jehovah before the eyes of all the congregation. David said: “May you be praised, O Jehovah the God of Israel our father, throughout all eternity. 11 Yours, O Jehovah, are the greatness and the mightiness and the beauty and the splendor and the majesty, for everything in the heavens and on the earth is yours. Yours is the kingdom, O Jehovah. You are the One exalting yourself as head over all. 12 The riches and the glory are from you, and you rule over everything, and in your hand there are power and mightiness, and your hand is able to make great and to give strength to all. 13 And now, O our God, we thank you and praise your beautiful name.14 “And yet, who am I and who are my people that we should be in a position to make voluntary offerings like this? For everything is from you, and we have given to you what comes from your own hand. 15 For we are foreign residents in your presence and settlers, just like all our forefathers. For our days on the earth are like a shadow—without hope. 16 O Jehovah our God, all this wealth that we have prepared to build for you a house for your holy name is from your own hand, and it all belongs to you. 17 I well know, O my God, that you examine the heart and that you take pleasure in integrity. In the uprightness of my heart, I have voluntarily offered all these things, and I am overjoyed to see your people who are present here make voluntary offerings to you. 18 O Jehovah, the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, our forefathers, keep these inclinations and thoughts in the hearts of your people forever, and direct their hearts to you. 19 And give a complete heart to my son Solʹo·mon, so that he may observe your commandments, your reminders, and your regulations and do all these things and build the temple for which I have made preparation.”20 David then said to all the congregation: “Now praise Jehovah your God.” And all the congregation praised Jehovah the God of their forefathers and bowed low and prostrated themselves to Jehovah and to the king. 21 And they continued to offer sacrifices to Jehovah and to offer up burnt offerings to Jehovah on the following day, 1,000 young bulls, 1,000 rams, 1,000 male lambs, and their drink offerings; they offered sacrifices in great number for all Israel. 22 They continued eating and drinking before Jehovah on that day with great rejoicing, and for a second time they made Solʹo·mon the son of David king and anointed him before Jehovah as leader, and also Zaʹdok as priest. 23 And Solʹo·mon sat on Jehovah’s throne as king in place of David his father, and he was successful, and all the Israelites were obedient to him. 24 All the princes, the mighty warriors, and also all the sons of King David submitted themselves to Solʹo·mon the king. 25 And Jehovah made Solʹo·mon exceedingly great before the eyes of all Israel and bestowed on him royal majesty such as no king over Israel ever had before.26 Thus David the son of Jesʹse reigned over all Israel, 27 and the length of his reign over Israel was 40 years. In Hebʹron he reigned for 7 years, and in Jerusalem he reigned for 33 years. 28 And he died at a good old age, satisfied with long life, wealth, and glory; and his son Solʹo·mon became king in his place. 29 As for the history of King David, from beginning to end, it is written among the words of Samuel the seer, Nathan the prophet, and Gad the visionary, 30 together with all his kingship, his mightiness, and the events of the times involving him and Israel and all the surrounding kingdoms.
3 These were the sons of David who were born to him in Hebʹron: the firstborn Amʹnon, whose mother was A·hinʹo·am of Jezʹre·el; the second, Daniel, whose mother was Abʹi·gail the Carʹmel·ite; 2 the third, Abʹsa·lom the son of Maʹa·cah the daughter of Talʹmai the king of Geshʹur; the fourth, Ad·o·niʹjah the son of Hagʹgith; 3 the fifth, Sheph·a·tiʹah, whose mother was A·biʹtal; and the sixth, Ithʹre·am, whose mother was David’s wife Egʹlah. 4 These six were born to him in Hebʹron; he reigned there for 7 years and 6 months, and for 33 years he reigned in Jerusalem.5 These were born to him in Jerusalem: Shimʹe·a, Shoʹbab, Nathan, and Solʹo·mon; the mother of these four was Bath-sheʹba the daughter of Amʹmi·el. 6 And nine other sons were Ibʹhar, E·lishʹa·ma, E·liphʹe·let, 7 Noʹgah, Neʹpheg, Ja·phiʹa, 8 E·lishʹa·ma, E·liʹa·da, and E·liphʹe·let. 9 All of these were the sons of David, besides the sons of the concubines, and Taʹmar was their sister.10 The son of Solʹo·mon was Re·ho·boʹam; A·biʹjah was his son, Aʹsa his son, Je·hoshʹa·phat his son, 11 Je·hoʹram his son, A·ha·ziʹah his son, Je·hoʹash his son, 12 Am·a·ziʹah his son, Az·a·riʹah his son, Joʹtham his son, 13 Aʹhaz his son, Hez·e·kiʹah his son, Ma·nasʹseh his son, 14 Aʹmon his son, Jo·siʹah his son. 15 The sons of Jo·siʹah were the firstborn, Jo·haʹnan, the second, Je·hoiʹa·kim, the third, Zed·e·kiʹah, the fourth, Shalʹlum. 16 The sons of Je·hoiʹa·kim were Jec·o·niʹah his son and Zed·e·kiʹah his son. 17 The sons of Jec·o·niʹah the prisoner were She·alʹti·el, 18 Mal·chiʹram, Pe·daiʹah, She·nazʹzar, Jek·a·miʹah, Hoshʹa·ma, and Ned·a·biʹah. 19 The sons of Pe·daiʹah were Ze·rubʹba·bel and Shimʹe·i; and the sons of Ze·rubʹba·bel were Me·shulʹlam and Han·a·niʹah (and She·loʹmith was their sister); 20 and five other sons were Ha·shuʹbah, Oʹhel, Ber·e·chiʹah, Has·a·diʹah, and Juʹshab-heʹsed. 21 And the sons of Han·a·niʹah were Pel·a·tiʹah and Je·shaʹiah; the son of Je·shaʹiah was Re·phaʹiah; the son of Re·phaʹiah was Arʹnan; the son of Arʹnan was O·ba·diʹah; the son of O·ba·diʹah was Shec·a·niʹah; 22 and the sons of Shec·a·niʹah were She·maiʹah and the sons of She·maiʹah: Hatʹtush, Iʹgal, Ba·riʹah, Ne·a·riʹah, and Shaʹphat—six in all. 23 And the sons of Ne·a·riʹah were Eli·o·eʹnai, Hiz·kiʹah, and Az·riʹkam, three. 24 And the sons of Eli·o·eʹnai were Hod·a·viʹah, E·liʹa·shib, Pe·laʹiah, Akʹkub, Jo·haʹnan, De·laʹiah, and A·naʹni, seven.
4 The sons of Judah were Peʹrez, Hezʹron, Carʹmi, Hur, and Shoʹbal. 2 Re·aʹiah the son of Shoʹbal became father to Jaʹhath; Jaʹhath became father to A·huʹmai and Laʹhad. These were the families of the Zoʹrath·ites. 3 These were the sons of the father of Eʹtam: Jezʹre·el, Ishʹma, and Idʹbash (and the name of their sister was Haz·ze·lel·poʹni), 4 and Pe·nuʹel was the father of Geʹdor, and Eʹzer was the father of Huʹshah. These were the sons of Hur, the firstborn of Ephʹra·thah and the father of Bethʹle·hem. 5 Ashʹhur the father of Te·koʹa had two wives, Heʹlah and Naʹa·rah. 6 Naʹa·rah bore to him A·huzʹzam, Heʹpher, Teʹme·ni, and Ha·a·hashʹta·ri. These were the sons of Naʹa·rah. 7 And the sons of Heʹlah were Zeʹreth, Izʹhar, and Ethʹnan. 8 Koz became father to Aʹnub, Zo·beʹbah, and the families of A·harʹhel the son of Haʹrum.9 Jaʹbez was more honorable than his brothers; and his mother named him Jaʹbez, saying: “I gave birth to him in pain.” 10 Jaʹbez called on the God of Israel, saying: “O that you would bless me and enlarge my territory and let your hand be with me and preserve me from calamity, so that it may bring no harm to me!” So God brought about what he had asked for.11 Cheʹlub the brother of Shuʹhah became father to Meʹhir, who was the father of Eshʹton. 12 Eshʹton became father to Beth-raʹpha, Pa·seʹah, and Te·hinʹnah, the father of Ir-naʹhash. These were the men of Reʹcah. 13 And the sons of Keʹnaz were Othʹni·el and Se·raiʹah, and the son of Othʹni·el was Haʹthath. 14 Me·oʹno·thai became father to Ophʹrah. Se·raiʹah became father to Joʹab the father of Ge-harʹa·shim, so called because they were craftsmen.15 The sons of Caʹleb the son of Je·phunʹneh were Iʹru, Eʹlah, and Naʹam; and the son of Eʹlah was Keʹnaz. 16 The sons of Je·halʹle·lel were Ziph, Ziʹphah, Tirʹi·a, and Asʹa·rel. 17 The sons of Ezʹrah were Jeʹther, Meʹred, Eʹpher, and Jaʹlon; she conceived and bore Mirʹi·am, Shamʹmai, and Ishʹbah the father of Esh·te·moʹa. 18 (And his Jewish wife gave birth to Jeʹred the father of Geʹdor, Heʹber the father of Soʹco, and Je·kuʹthi·el the father of Za·noʹah.) These were the sons of Bi·thiʹah, the daughter of Pharʹaoh, whom Meʹred married.19 The sons of Ho·diʹah’s wife, the sister of Naʹham, were the fathers of Keiʹlah the Garʹmite and Esh·te·moʹa the Ma·acʹa·thite. 20 And the sons of Shiʹmon were Amʹnon, Rinʹnah, Ben-haʹnan, and Tiʹlon. And the sons of Ishʹi were Zoʹheth and Ben-zoʹheth.21 The sons of Sheʹlah the son of Judah were Er the father of Leʹcah, Laʹa·dah the father of Ma·reʹshah, and the families of the workers of fine fabric of the house of Ash·beʹa, 22 and Joʹkim, the men of Co·zeʹba, Joʹash, and Saʹraph, who became husbands of Moʹab·ite women, and Jashʹu·bi-leʹhem. These records are ancient. 23 They were potters who lived in Ne·taʹim and Ge·deʹrah. They lived there and worked for the king.24 The sons of Simʹe·on were Nemʹu·el, Jaʹmin, Jaʹrib, Zeʹrah, and Shaʹul. 25 Shalʹlum was his son, Mibʹsam his son, and Mishʹma his son. 26 And the sons of Mishʹma were Hamʹmu·el his son, Zacʹcur his son, Shimʹe·i his son. 27 And Shimʹe·i had 16 sons and 6 daughters; but his brothers did not have many sons, and none of their families had as many as the men of Judah had. 28 They lived in Beʹer-sheʹba, Mo·laʹdah, Haʹzar-shuʹal, 29 Bilʹhah, Eʹzem, Toʹlad, 30 Be·thuʹel, Horʹmah, Zikʹlag, 31 Beth-marʹca·both, Haʹzar-suʹsim, Beth-birʹi, and Shaʹa·raʹim. These were their cities until the reign of David.32 Their settlements were Eʹtam, Aʹin, Rimʹmon, Toʹchen, and Aʹshan, five cities, 33 along with their settlements that were all around these cities as far as Baʹal. These were their genealogical enrollments and the places where they lived. 34 And Me·shoʹbab, Jamʹlech, Joʹshah the son of Am·a·ziʹah, 35 Joel, Jeʹhu son of Josh·i·biʹah son of Se·raiʹah son of Asʹi·el, 36 and Eli·o·eʹnai, Ja·a·koʹbah, Jesh·o·haiʹah, A·saiʹah, Adʹi·el, Je·simʹi·el, Be·naiʹah, 37 and Ziʹza son of Shiʹphi son of Alʹlon son of Je·daʹiah son of Shimʹri son of She·maiʹah; 38 these mentioned by name were the chieftains among their families, and the household of their forefathers increased in number. 39 And they went to the entrance of Geʹdor, to the east side of the valley, to look for pastures for their flocks. 40 They eventually found rich and good pastures, and the land was spacious, quiet, and undisturbed. Those who previously lived there were Hamʹites. 41 These whose names are listed came during the days of King Hez·e·kiʹah of Judah and struck down the tents of the Hamʹites and the Me·uʹnim who were there. They devoted them to destruction down to this day; and they settled in their place because there were pastures for their flocks there.42 Some of the Simʹe·on·ites, 500 men, went to Mount Seʹir with Pel·a·tiʹah, Ne·a·riʹah, Re·phaʹiah, and Uzʹzi·el, the sons of Ishʹi who led them. 43 And they struck down the rest of the A·malʹek·ites who had escaped, and they have lived there down to this day.
5 These are the sons of Reuʹben, Israel’s firstborn. He was the firstborn, but because he defiled the bed of his father, his right as firstborn was given to the sons of Joseph the son of Israel, so he was not enrolled genealogically for the right of the firstborn. 2 Though Judah was superior to his brothers and from him came the one to be the leader, the right as firstborn belonged to Joseph. 3 The sons of Reuʹben the firstborn of Israel were Haʹnoch, Palʹlu, Hezʹron, and Carʹmi. 4 The sons of Joel were She·maiʹah his son, Gog his son, Shimʹe·i his son, 5 Miʹcah his son, Re·aʹiah his son, Baʹal his son, 6 and Be·erʹah his son, whom King Tilʹgath-pil·neʹser of As·syrʹi·a took into exile; he was a chieftain of the Reuʹben·ites. 7 His brothers by their families in the genealogical enrollment by their descendants were, as the head, Je·iʹel, Zech·a·riʹah, 8 and Beʹla son of Aʹzaz son of Sheʹma son of Joel, who lived in A·roʹer and as far as Neʹbo and Baʹal-meʹon. 9 To the east he settled as far as the beginning of the wilderness at the Eu·phraʹtes River, for their livestock had become numerous in the land of Gilʹe·ad. 10 In the days of Saul, they waged war against the Hagʹrites, who were defeated before them, so they dwelled in their tents throughout all the territory east of Gilʹe·ad.11 Now the descendants of Gad lived next to them in the land of Baʹshan as far as Salʹe·cah. 12 Joel was the head, Shaʹpham the second, and Jaʹnai and Shaʹphat in Baʹshan. 13 And their brothers belonging to their paternal houses were Miʹcha·el, Me·shulʹlam, Sheʹba, Joʹrai, Jaʹcan, Ziʹa, and Eʹber, seven in all. 14 These were the sons of Abʹi·ha·il son of Huʹri son of Ja·roʹah son of Gilʹe·ad son of Miʹcha·el son of Je·shishʹai son of Jahʹdo son of Buz. 15 Aʹhi son of Abʹdi·el son of Guʹni was head of their paternal house. 16 They lived in Gilʹe·ad, in Baʹshan and its dependent towns, and in all the pastures of Sharʹon as far as they extended. 17 They were all enrolled genealogically in the days of King Joʹtham of Judah and in the days of King Jer·o·boʹam of Israel.18 The Reuʹben·ites, the Gadʹites, and the half tribe of Ma·nasʹseh had 44,760 mighty warriors in their army who carried shields and swords and were armed with bows, and they were trained in war. 19 They waged war against the Hagʹrites, Jeʹtur, Naʹphish, and Noʹdab. 20 And they were helped in fighting them, so that the Hagʹrites and all who were with them were given into their hand, for they called to God for help in the war, and he responded to their entreaty because they trusted in him. 21 They captured their livestock—50,000 camels, 250,000 sheep, and 2,000 donkeys—as well as 100,000 people. 22 Many had fallen slain, because the war was waged by the true God. And they lived in their place until the time of the exile.23 The descendants of the half tribe of Ma·nasʹseh lived in the land from Baʹshan to Baʹal-herʹmon and Seʹnir and Mount Herʹmon. They were numerous. 24 These were the heads of their paternal houses: Eʹpher, Ishʹi, Eʹli·el, Azʹri·el, Jeremiah, Hod·a·viʹah, and Jahʹdi·el; they were mighty warriors, men of fame, and heads of their paternal houses. 25 But they acted unfaithfully toward the God of their forefathers and prostituted themselves to the gods of the peoples of the land, whom God had annihilated from before them. 26 So the God of Israel stirred up the spirit of King Pul of As·syrʹi·a (that is, King Tilʹgath-pil·neʹser of As·syrʹi·a) so that he took into exile those of the Reuʹben·ites, the Gadʹites, and the half tribe of Ma·nasʹseh and brought them to Haʹlah, Haʹbor, Haʹra, and the river Goʹzan, where they are until this day.
6 The sons of Leʹvi were Gerʹshon, Koʹhath, and Me·rarʹi. 2 The sons of Koʹhath were Amʹram, Izʹhar, Hebʹron, and Uzʹzi·el. 3 The children of Amʹram were Aaron, Moses, and also Mirʹi·am. And the sons of Aaron were Naʹdab, A·biʹhu, El·e·aʹzar, and Ithʹa·mar. 4 El·e·aʹzar became father to Phinʹe·has; Phinʹe·has became father to Ab·i·shuʹa. 5 Ab·i·shuʹa became father to Bukʹki; Bukʹki became father to Uzʹzi. 6 Uzʹzi became father to Zer·a·hiʹah; Zer·a·hiʹah became father to Me·raʹioth. 7 Me·raʹioth became father to Am·a·riʹah; Am·a·riʹah became father to A·hiʹtub. 8 A·hiʹtub became father to Zaʹdok; Zaʹdok became father to A·himʹa·az. 9 A·himʹa·az became father to Az·a·riʹah; Az·a·riʹah became father to Jo·haʹnan. 10 Jo·haʹnan became father to Az·a·riʹah. He served as priest in the house that Solʹo·mon built in Jerusalem.11 Az·a·riʹah became father to Am·a·riʹah; Am·a·riʹah became father to A·hiʹtub. 12 A·hiʹtub became father to Zaʹdok; Zaʹdok became father to Shalʹlum. 13 Shalʹlum became father to Hil·kiʹah; Hil·kiʹah became father to Az·a·riʹah. 14 Az·a·riʹah became father to Se·raiʹah; Se·raiʹah became father to Je·hozʹa·dak. 15 And Je·hozʹa·dak went into exile when Jehovah took Judah and Jerusalem into exile by the hand of Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar.16 The sons of Leʹvi were Gerʹshom, Koʹhath, and Me·rarʹi. 17 These are the names of the sons of Gerʹshom: Libʹni and Shimʹe·i. 18 The sons of Koʹhath were Amʹram, Izʹhar, Hebʹron, and Uzʹzi·el. 19 The sons of Me·rarʹi were Mahʹli and Muʹshi.These were the families of the Levites by their forefathers: 20 Of Gerʹshom, Libʹni his son, Jaʹhath his son, Zimʹmah his son, 21 Joʹah his son, Idʹdo his son, Zeʹrah his son, Je·athʹe·rai his son. 22 The sons of Koʹhath were Am·minʹa·dab his son, Korʹah his son, Asʹsir his son, 23 El·kaʹnah his son, E·biʹa·saph his son, Asʹsir his son, 24 Taʹhath his son, U·riʹel his son, Uz·ziʹah his son, and Shaʹul his son. 25 The sons of El·kaʹnah were A·maʹsai and A·hiʹmoth. 26 As for El·kaʹnah, the sons of El·kaʹnah were Zoʹphai his son, Naʹhath his son, 27 E·liʹab his son, Je·roʹham his son, El·kaʹnah his son. 28 The sons of Samuel were Joel the firstborn and A·biʹjah the second. 29 The sons of Me·rarʹi were Mahʹli, Libʹni his son, Shimʹe·i his son, Uzʹzah his son, 30 Shimʹe·a his son, Hag·giʹah his son, and A·saiʹah his son.31 These were the ones whom David appointed to direct the singing at the house of Jehovah after the Ark came to rest there. 32 They were responsible for the singing at the tabernacle of the tent of meeting until Solʹo·mon built the house of Jehovah in Jerusalem, and they carried out their service as prescribed for them. 33 These are the men who served with their sons: Of the Koʹhath·ites, Heʹman the singer, son of Joel son of Samuel 34 son of El·kaʹnah son of Je·roʹham son of Eʹli·el son of Toʹah 35 son of Zuph son of El·kaʹnah son of Maʹhath son of A·maʹsai 36 son of El·kaʹnah son of Joel son of Az·a·riʹah son of Zeph·a·niʹah 37 son of Taʹhath son of Asʹsir son of E·biʹa·saph son of Korʹah 38 son of Izʹhar son of Koʹhath son of Leʹvi son of Israel.39 His brother Aʹsaph stood at his right hand; Aʹsaph was son of Ber·e·chiʹah son of Shimʹe·a 40 son of Miʹcha·el son of Ba·a·seʹiah son of Mal·chiʹjah 41 son of Ethʹni son of Zeʹrah son of A·daiʹah 42 son of Eʹthan son of Zimʹmah son of Shimʹe·i 43 son of Jaʹhath son of Gerʹshom son of Leʹvi.44 The descendants of Me·rarʹi their brothers were at the left hand; there was Eʹthan son of Kishʹi son of Abʹdi son of Malʹluch 45 son of Hash·a·biʹah son of Am·a·ziʹah son of Hil·kiʹah 46 son of Amʹzi son of Baʹni son of Sheʹmer 47 son of Mahʹli son of Muʹshi son of Me·rarʹi son of Leʹvi.48 Their brothers the Levites were appointed for all the service of the tabernacle, the house of the true God. 49 Aaron and his sons made the sacrifices smoke on the altar of burnt offering and on the altar of incense, performing the duties connected with the most holy things, to make atonement for Israel, according to all that Moses the servant of the true God had commanded. 50 These were the descendants of Aaron: El·e·aʹzar his son, Phinʹe·has his son, Ab·i·shuʹa his son, 51 Bukʹki his son, Uzʹzi his son, Zer·a·hiʹah his son, 52 Me·raʹioth his son, Am·a·riʹah his son, A·hiʹtub his son, 53 Zaʹdok his son, and A·himʹa·az his son.54 These were their settlements by their encampments in their territory: for the descendants of Aaron belonging to the family of the Koʹhath·ites, as the first lot fell to them, 55 they gave them Hebʹron in the land of Judah, with its surrounding pastures. 56 But the field of the city and its settlements they gave to Caʹleb the son of Je·phunʹneh. 57 And to the descendants of Aaron they gave the cities of refuge, Hebʹron, also Libʹnah with its pastures, Jatʹtir, Esh·te·moʹa with its pastures, 58 Hiʹlen with its pastures, Deʹbir with its pastures, 59 Aʹshan with its pastures, and Beth-sheʹmesh with its pastures; 60 and from the tribe of Benjamin, Geʹba with its pastures, Alʹe·meth with its pastures, and Anʹa·thoth with its pastures. All their cities for their families were 13 cities.61 To the rest of the Koʹhath·ites, there were allotted ten cities, from the family of the tribe, from the half tribe, the half of Ma·nasʹseh.62 To the Gerʹshom·ites by their families they assigned 13 cities from the tribe of Isʹsa·char, the tribe of Ashʹer, the tribe of Naphʹta·li, and the tribe of Ma·nasʹseh in Baʹshan.63 To the Me·rarʹites by their families they assigned by lot 12 cities from the tribe of Reuʹben, the tribe of Gad, and the tribe of Zebʹu·lun.64 Thus the Israelites gave the Levites these cities with their pastures. 65 Furthermore, they assigned by lot these cities from the tribe of Judah, the tribe of Simʹe·on, and the tribe of Benjamin, which are mentioned by their names.66 Some of the Koʹhath·ite families had cities from the tribe of Eʹphra·im as their territory. 67 They gave them the cities of refuge, Sheʹchem with its pastures in the mountainous region of Eʹphra·im, Geʹzer with its pastures, 68 Jokʹme·am with its pastures, Beth-hoʹron with its pastures, 69 Aiʹja·lon with its pastures, and Gath-rimʹmon with its pastures; 70 and from half of the tribe of Ma·nasʹseh, Aʹner with its pastures and Bilʹe·am with its pastures, to the rest of the families of the Koʹhath·ites.71 To the Gerʹshom·ites they assigned from the family of the half tribe of Ma·nasʹseh, Goʹlan in Baʹshan with its pastures and Ashʹta·roth with its pastures; 72 and from the tribe of Isʹsa·char, Keʹdesh with its pastures, Dabʹe·rath with its pastures, 73 Raʹmoth with its pastures, and Aʹnem with its pastures; 74 and from the tribe of Ashʹer, Maʹshal with its pastures, Abʹdon with its pastures, 75 Huʹkok with its pastures, and Reʹhob with its pastures; 76 and from the tribe of Naphʹta·li, Keʹdesh in Galʹi·lee with its pastures, Hamʹmon with its pastures, and Kir·i·a·thaʹim with its pastures.77 To the rest of the Me·rarʹites they assigned from the tribe of Zebʹu·lun, Rimʹmo·no with its pastures, Taʹbor with its pastures; 78 and in the region of the Jordan at Jerʹi·cho, to the east of the Jordan, from the tribe of Reuʹben, they were given Beʹzer in the wilderness with its pastures, Jaʹhaz with its pastures, 79 Kedʹe·moth with its pastures, and Mephʹa·ath with its pastures; 80 and from the tribe of Gad, Raʹmoth in Gilʹe·ad with its pastures, Ma·ha·naʹim with its pastures, 81 Heshʹbon with its pastures, and Jaʹzer with its pastures.
7 Now the sons of Isʹsa·char were Toʹla, Puʹah, Jaʹshub, and Shimʹron—four. 2 And the sons of Toʹla were Uzʹzi, Re·phaʹiah, Jeʹri·el, Jahʹmai, Ibʹsam, and She·muʹel, the heads of their paternal houses. Descended from Toʹla were mighty warriors, whose number in the days of David was 22,600. 3 And the descendants of Uzʹzi were Iz·ra·hiʹah and the sons of Iz·ra·hiʹah: Miʹcha·el, O·ba·diʹah, Joel, and Is·shiʹah—all five of them were chiefs. 4 And with them by their descendants, according to their paternal houses, there were 36,000 soldiers in their army available for war, for they had many wives and sons. 5 And their brothers of all the families of Isʹsa·char were mighty warriors, 87,000 as listed in the genealogical enrollment.6 The sons of Benjamin were Beʹla, Beʹcher, and Je·diʹa·el—three. 7 And the sons of Beʹla were Ezʹbon, Uzʹzi, Uzʹzi·el, Jerʹi·moth, and Iʹri—five—heads of their paternal houses, mighty warriors, and 22,034 were in their genealogical enrollment. 8 And the sons of Beʹcher were Ze·miʹrah, Joʹash, E·li·eʹzer, Eli·o·eʹnai, Omʹri, Jerʹe·moth, A·biʹjah, Anʹa·thoth, and Alʹe·meth—all of these were the sons of Beʹcher. 9 Their genealogical enrollment by their descendants as respects the heads of their paternal houses was 20,200 mighty warriors. 10 And the sons of Je·diʹa·el were Bilʹhan and the sons of Bilʹhan: Jeʹush, Benjamin, Eʹhud, Che·naʹa·nah, Zeʹthan, Tarʹshish, and A·hishʹa·har. 11 All of these were the sons of Je·diʹa·el, according to the heads of their forefathers, 17,200 mighty warriors ready to go out to the army for war.12 The Shupʹpim and the Hupʹpim were the sons of Ir; the Huʹshim were the sons of Aʹher.13 The sons of Naphʹta·li were Jahʹzi·el, Guʹni, Jeʹzer, and Shalʹlum—descendants of Bilʹhah.14 The sons of Ma·nasʹseh: Asʹri·el, whom his Syrian concubine bore. (She bore Maʹchir the father of Gilʹe·ad. 15 Maʹchir took a wife for Hupʹpim and for Shupʹpim, and the name of his sister was Maʹa·cah.) The name of the second was Ze·loʹphe·had, but Ze·loʹphe·had had daughters. 16 Maʹa·cah, Maʹchir’s wife, bore a son and named him Peʹresh; and the name of his brother was Sheʹresh; and his sons were Uʹlam and Reʹkem. 17 And the son of Uʹlam was Beʹdan. These were the sons of Gilʹe·ad son of Maʹchir son of Ma·nasʹseh. 18 And his sister was Ham·moʹle·cheth. She gave birth to Ishʹhod, Abi-eʹzer, and Mahʹlah. 19 And the sons of She·miʹda were A·hiʹan, Sheʹchem, Likʹhi, and A·niʹam.20 The sons of Eʹphra·im were Shuʹthe·lah, Beʹred his son, Taʹhath his son, E·le·aʹdah his son, Taʹhath his son, 21 Zaʹbad his son, Shuʹthe·lah his son, Eʹzer, and Eʹle·ad. The men of Gath who were born in the land killed them because they went down to take their livestock. 22 Eʹphra·im their father carried on mourning for many days, and his brothers kept coming in to comfort him. 23 Afterward he had relations with his wife, and she became pregnant and gave birth to a son. But he named him Be·riʹah because it was with calamity that she was in his house. 24 And his daughter was Sheʹe·rah, who built Lower and Upper Beth-hoʹron and Uzʹzen-sheʹe·rah. 25 And there was Reʹphah his son, Reʹsheph, Teʹlah his son, Taʹhan his son, 26 Laʹdan his son, Am·miʹhud his son, E·lishʹa·ma his son, 27 Nun his son, and Joshua his son.28 Their possession and their settlements were Bethʹel and its dependent towns, and to the east Naʹa·ran, and to the west Geʹzer and its dependent towns, and Sheʹchem and its dependent towns, as far as Ayʹyah and its dependent towns; 29 and next to the descendants of Ma·nasʹseh, Beth-sheʹan and its dependent towns, Taʹa·nach and its dependent towns, Me·gidʹdo and its dependent towns, and Dor and its dependent towns. In these the descendants of Joseph the son of Israel lived.30 The sons of Ashʹer were Imʹnah, Ishʹvah, Ishʹvi, and Be·riʹah, and their sister was Seʹrah. 31 The sons of Be·riʹah were Heʹber and Malʹchi·el, who was the father of Birʹza·ith. 32 Heʹber became father to Japhʹlet, Shoʹmer, and Hoʹtham, and to Shuʹa their sister. 33 The sons of Japhʹlet were Paʹsach, Bimʹhal, and Ashʹvath. These were the sons of Japhʹlet. 34 The sons of Sheʹmer were Aʹhi, Rohʹgah, Je·hubʹbah, and Aʹram. 35 The sons of Heʹlem his brother were Zoʹphah, Imʹna, Sheʹlesh, and Aʹmal. 36 The sons of Zoʹphah were Suʹah, Harʹne·pher, Shuʹal, Beʹri, Imʹrah, 37 Beʹzer, Hod, Shamʹma, Shilʹshah, Ithʹran, and Be·eʹra. 38 The sons of Jeʹther were Je·phunʹneh, Pisʹpah, and Aʹra. 39 The sons of Ulʹla were Aʹrah, Hanʹni·el, and Ri·ziʹa. 40 All of these were the sons of Ashʹer, heads of their paternal houses, select, mighty warriors, heads of the chieftains; and their number listed in the genealogical enrollment was 26,000 men in the army available for war.
8 Benjamin became father to Beʹla his firstborn, Ashʹbel the second, A·harʹah the third, 2 Noʹhah the fourth, and Raʹpha the fifth. 3 Beʹla’s sons were Adʹdar, Geʹra, A·biʹhud, 4 Ab·i·shuʹa, Naʹa·man, A·hoʹah, 5 Geʹra, She·phuʹphan, and Huʹram. 6 These were the sons of Eʹhud, the heads of the paternal houses of the inhabitants of Geʹba, who were taken into exile to Manʹa·hath: 7 Naʹa·man, A·hiʹjah, and Geʹra—he was the one who took them into exile and he became father to Uzʹza and A·hiʹhud. 8 Sha·ha·raʹim became father to children in the territory of Moʹab after he sent them away. Huʹshim and Baʹa·ra were his wives. 9 And by his wife Hoʹdesh, he became father to Joʹbab, Zibʹi·a, Meʹsha, Malʹcam, 10 Jeʹuz, Sa·chiʹa, and Mirʹmah. These were his sons, heads of the paternal houses.11 By Huʹshim he became father to A·biʹtub and El·paʹal. 12 And the sons of El·paʹal were Eʹber, Miʹsham, Sheʹmed (who built Oʹno and Lod and its dependent towns), 13 Be·riʹah, and Sheʹma. These were heads of the paternal houses of the inhabitants of Aiʹja·lon. These drove out the inhabitants of Gath. 14 And there were A·hiʹo, Shaʹshak, Jerʹe·moth, 15 Zeb·a·diʹah, Aʹrad, Eʹder, 16 Miʹcha·el, Ishʹpah, Joʹha, the sons of Be·riʹah; 17 and Zeb·a·diʹah, Me·shulʹlam, Hizʹki, Heʹber, 18 Ishʹme·rai, Iz·liʹah, Joʹbab, the sons of El·paʹal; 19 and Jaʹkim, Zichʹri, Zabʹdi, 20 E·li·eʹnai, Zilʹle·thai, Eʹli·el, 21 A·daiʹah, Be·raʹiah, Shimʹrath, the sons of Shimʹe·i; 22 and Ishʹpan, Eʹber, Eʹli·el, 23 Abʹdon, Zichʹri, Haʹnan, 24 Han·a·niʹah, Eʹlam, An·tho·thiʹjah, 25 Iph·deʹiah, Pe·nuʹel, the sons of Shaʹshak; 26 and Shamʹshe·rai, She·ha·riʹah, Ath·a·liʹah, 27 Ja·a·re·shiʹah, E·liʹjah, Zichʹri, the sons of Je·roʹham. 28 These were heads of the paternal houses by their descendants. These headmen lived in Jerusalem.29 The father of Gibʹe·on, Je·iʹel, lived in Gibʹe·on. His wife’s name was Maʹa·cah. 30 And his firstborn son was Abʹdon, followed by Zur, Kish, Baʹal, Naʹdab, 31 Geʹdor, A·hiʹo, and Zeʹcher. 32 Mikʹloth became father to Shimʹe·ah. And they all lived near their brothers in Jerusalem, along with their other brothers.33 Ner became father to Kish; Kish became father to Saul; Saul became father to Jonʹa·than, Malʹchi-shuʹa, A·binʹa·dab, and Esh·baʹal. 34 And Jonʹa·than’s son was Merʹib-baʹal. Merʹib-baʹal became father to Miʹcah. 35 And the sons of Miʹcah were Piʹthon, Melʹech, Ta·reʹa, and Aʹhaz. 36 Aʹhaz became father to Je·hoʹad·dah; Je·hoʹad·dah became father to Alʹe·meth, Azʹma·veth, and Zimʹri. Zimʹri became father to Moʹza. 37 Moʹza became father to Binʹe·a, Raʹphah his son, El·e·aʹsah his son, Aʹzel his son. 38 Aʹzel had six sons, and their names were Az·riʹkam, Boʹche·ru, Ishʹma·el, She·a·riʹah, O·ba·diʹah, and Haʹnan. All of these were the sons of Aʹzel. 39 And the sons of his brother Eʹshek were Uʹlam his firstborn, Jeʹush the second, and E·liphʹe·let the third. 40 And the sons of Uʹlam were mighty warriors who could handle the bow, and they had many sons and grandsons, numbering 150. All of these were descendants of Benjamin.
9 All the Israelites were enrolled genealogically, and they are written in the Book of the Kings of Israel. And Judah was taken into exile to Babylon for their unfaithfulness. 2 The first inhabitants to return to their possession in their cities were some Israelites, the priests, the Levites, and the temple servants. 3 And some of the descendants of Judah, of Benjamin, of Eʹphra·im, and of Ma·nasʹseh settled in Jerusalem: 4 Uʹthai son of Am·miʹhud son of Omʹri son of Imʹri son of Baʹni, of the descendants of Peʹrez son of Judah. 5 And of the Shiʹlo·nites, A·saiʹah the firstborn and his sons. 6 And of the sons of Zeʹrah, Je·uʹel and 690 of their brothers.7 And of the descendants of Benjamin, Salʹlu son of Me·shulʹlam son of Hod·a·viʹah son of Has·se·nuʹah, 8 Ib·neʹiah son of Je·roʹham, Eʹlah son of Uzʹzi son of Michʹri, and Me·shulʹlam son of Sheph·a·tiʹah son of Reuʹel son of Ib·niʹjah. 9 And their brothers by line of descent were 956. All these men were heads of their paternal houses.10 And of the priests, there were Je·daʹiah, Je·hoiʹa·rib, Jaʹchin, 11 Az·a·riʹah son of Hil·kiʹah son of Me·shulʹlam son of Zaʹdok son of Me·raʹioth son of A·hiʹtub, a leader of the house of the true God, 12 A·daiʹah son of Je·roʹham son of Pashʹhur son of Mal·chiʹjah, Maʹa·sai son of Adʹi·el son of Jahʹze·rah son of Me·shulʹlam son of Me·shilʹle·mith son of Imʹmer, 13 and their brothers, heads of the paternal houses, 1,760 mighty, capable men available for the service of the house of the true God.14 And of the Levites, there were She·maiʹah son of Hasʹshub son of Az·riʹkam son of Hash·a·biʹah from the descendants of Me·rarʹi; 15 and Bak·bakʹkar, Heʹresh, Gaʹlal, Mat·ta·niʹah son of Miʹca son of Zichʹri son of Aʹsaph, 16 O·ba·diʹah son of She·maiʹah son of Gaʹlal son of Je·duʹthun, and Ber·e·chiʹah son of Aʹsa son of El·kaʹnah, who was dwelling in the settlements of the Ne·tophʹa·thites.17 The gatekeepers were Shalʹlum, Akʹkub, Talʹmon, A·hiʹman, and their brother Shalʹlum the head, 18 and until then he was at the king’s gate to the east. These were the gatekeepers of the camps of the Levites. 19 And Shalʹlum son of Koʹre son of E·biʹa·saph son of Korʹah, and his brothers of his paternal house, the Korʹah·ites, were over the duties of the service, the doorkeepers of the tent, and their fathers had been over the camp of Jehovah as the keepers of the entryway. 20 It was Phinʹe·has the son of El·e·aʹzar who had been their leader in the past; Jehovah was with him. 21 Zech·a·riʹah the son of Me·shel·e·miʹah was the gatekeeper of the entrance of the tent of meeting.22 All those selected as gatekeepers at the thresholds numbered 212. They were in their settlements by their genealogical enrollment. David and Samuel the seer appointed these to their office of trust. 23 They and their sons were over the guard service for the gates of the house of Jehovah, the house of the tent. 24 The gatekeepers were on the four sides—east, west, north, and south. 25 From time to time, their brothers were to come in from their settlements for seven days to serve along with them. 26 There were four chief gatekeepers in the office of trust. They were Levites, and they were in charge of the chambers and of the treasuries of the house of the true God. 27 They would spend the night in their stations all around the house of the true God, for they cared for the guard service and were in charge of the key and would open up the house from morning to morning.28 Some of them were in charge of the utensils of the service; they would count them when they brought them in and count them when they took them out. 29 Some of them were appointed over the utensils, over all the holy utensils, and over the fine flour, the wine, the oil, the frankincense, and the balsam oil. 30 Some of the sons of the priests mixed the ointment of balsam oil. 31 And Mat·ti·thiʹah of the Levites, who was the firstborn of Shalʹlum the Korʹah·ite, was in the office of trust over the things baked in pans. 32 Some of their brothers of the Koʹhath·ites were in charge of the layer bread, to prepare it every sabbath.33 These were the singers, the heads of the paternal houses of the Levites in the chambers, those set free from other duties; for by day and by night it was their responsibility to be on duty. 34 These were the heads of the paternal houses of the Levites by their line of descent, headmen. These lived in Jerusalem.35 The father of Gibʹe·on, Je·iʹel, lived in Gibʹe·on. His wife’s name was Maʹa·cah. 36 And his firstborn son was Abʹdon, followed by Zur, Kish, Baʹal, Ner, Naʹdab, 37 Geʹdor, A·hiʹo, Zech·a·riʹah, and Mikʹloth. 38 Mikʹloth became father to Shimʹe·am. And they all lived near their brothers in Jerusalem, along with their other brothers. 39 Ner became father to Kish; Kish became father to Saul; Saul became father to Jonʹa·than, Malʹchi-shuʹa, A·binʹa·dab, and Esh·baʹal. 40 And Jonʹa·than’s son was Merʹib-baʹal. Merʹib-baʹal became father to Miʹcah. 41 And the sons of Miʹcah were Piʹthon, Melʹech, Tahrʹe·a, and Aʹhaz. 42 Aʹhaz became father to Jaʹrah; Jaʹrah became father to Alʹe·meth, Azʹma·veth, and Zimʹri. Zimʹri became father to Moʹza. 43 Moʹza became father to Binʹe·a and Re·phaʹiah his son, El·e·aʹsah his son, Aʹzel his son. 44 Aʹzel had six sons, and their names were Az·riʹkam, Boʹche·ru, Ishʹma·el, She·a·riʹah, O·ba·diʹah, and Haʹnan. These were the sons of Aʹzel.
1 Adam,Seth,Eʹnosh,2 Keʹnan,Ma·halʹa·lel,Jaʹred,3 Eʹnoch,Me·thuʹse·lah,Laʹmech,4 Noah,Shem, Ham, and Jaʹpheth.5 The sons of Jaʹpheth were Goʹmer, Maʹgog, Maʹda·i, Jaʹvan, Tuʹbal, Meʹshech, and Tiʹras.6 The sons of Goʹmer were Ashʹke·naz, Riʹphath, and To·garʹmah.7 The sons of Jaʹvan were E·liʹshah, Tarʹshish, Kitʹtim, and Roʹda·nim.8 The sons of Ham were Cush, Mizʹra·im, Put, and Caʹnaan.9 The sons of Cush were Seʹba, Havʹi·lah, Sabʹtah, Raʹa·mah, and Sabʹte·ca.The sons of Raʹa·mah were Sheʹba and Deʹdan.10 Cush became father to Nimʹrod. He was the first to become a mighty one on the earth.11 Mizʹra·im became father to Luʹdim, Anʹa·mim, Le·haʹbim, Naph·tuʹhim, 12 Path·ruʹsim, Cas·luʹhim (from whom the Phi·lisʹtines came), and Caphʹto·rim.13 Caʹnaan became father to Siʹdon, his firstborn, and Heth, 14 as well as the Jebʹu·site, the Amʹor·ite, the Girʹga·shite, 15 the Hiʹvite, the Arkʹite, the Siʹnite, 16 the Arʹvad·ite, the Zemʹa·rite, and the Haʹmath·ite.17 The sons of Shem were Eʹlam, Asʹshur, Ar·pachʹshad, Lud, and Aʹram,and Uz, Hul, Geʹther, and Mash.18 Ar·pachʹshad became father to Sheʹlah, and Sheʹlah became father to Eʹber.19 Two sons were born to Eʹber. The name of the one was Peʹleg, because in his lifetime the earth was divided. The name of his brother was Jokʹtan.20 Jokʹtan became father to Al·moʹdad, Sheʹleph, Ha·zar·maʹveth, Jeʹrah, 21 Ha·doʹram, Uʹzal, Dikʹlah, 22 Oʹbal, A·bimʹa·el, Sheʹba, 23 Oʹphir, Havʹi·lah, and Joʹbab; all of these were the sons of Jokʹtan.24 Shem,Ar·pachʹshad,Sheʹlah,25 Eʹber,Peʹleg,Reʹu,26 Seʹrug,Naʹhor,Teʹrah,27 Aʹbram, that is, Abraham.28 The sons of Abraham were Isaac and Ishʹma·el.29 These are their family origins: Ishʹma·el’s firstborn Ne·baʹioth, then Keʹdar, Adʹbe·el, Mibʹsam, 30 Mishʹma, Duʹmah, Masʹsa, Haʹdad, Teʹma, 31 Jeʹtur, Naʹphish, and Kedʹe·mah. These were the sons of Ishʹma·el.32 The sons that Ke·tuʹrah, Abraham’s concubine, gave birth to were Zimʹran, Jokʹshan, Meʹdan, Midʹi·an, Ishʹbak, and Shuʹah.The sons of Jokʹshan were Sheʹba and Deʹdan.33 The sons of Midʹi·an were Eʹphah, Eʹpher, Haʹnoch, A·biʹda, and El·daʹah.All of these were the sons of Ke·tuʹrah.34 Abraham became father to Isaac. The sons of Isaac were Eʹsau and Israel.35 The sons of Eʹsau were Elʹi·phaz, Reuʹel, Jeʹush, Jaʹlam, and Korʹah.36 The sons of Elʹi·phaz were Teʹman, Oʹmar, Zeʹpho, Gaʹtam, Keʹnaz, Timʹna, and Amʹa·lek.37 The sons of Reuʹel were Naʹhath, Zeʹrah, Shamʹmah, and Mizʹzah.38 The sons of Seʹir were Loʹtan, Shoʹbal, Zibʹe·on, Aʹnah, Diʹshon, Eʹzer, and Diʹshan.39 The sons of Loʹtan were Hoʹri and Hoʹmam. Loʹtan’s sister was Timʹna.40 The sons of Shoʹbal were Alʹvan, Manʹa·hath, Eʹbal, Sheʹpho, and Oʹnam.The sons of Zibʹe·on were Aʹiah and Aʹnah.41 The son of Aʹnah was Diʹshon.The sons of Diʹshon were Hemʹdan, Eshʹban, Ithʹran, and Cheʹran.42 The sons of Eʹzer were Bilʹhan, Zaʹa·van, and Aʹkan.The sons of Diʹshan were Uz and Aʹran.43 These are the kings who reigned in the land of Eʹdom before any king reigned over the Israelites: Beʹla the son of Beʹor; the name of his city was Dinʹha·bah. 44 When Beʹla died, Joʹbab the son of Zeʹrah from Bozʹrah began to reign in his place. 45 When Joʹbab died, Huʹsham from the land of the Teʹman·ites began to reign in his place. 46 When Huʹsham died, Haʹdad the son of Beʹdad, who defeated Midʹi·an in the territory of Moʹab, began to reign in his place. The name of his city was Aʹvith. 47 When Haʹdad died, Samʹlah from Mas·reʹkah began to reign in his place. 48 When Samʹlah died, Shaʹul from Re·hoʹboth by the River began to reign in his place. 49 When Shaʹul died, Baʹal-haʹnan the son of Achʹbor began to reign in his place. 50 When Baʹal-haʹnan died, Haʹdad began to reign in his place. The name of his city was Paʹu, and the name of his wife was Me·hetʹa·bel the daughter of Maʹtred, the daughter of Meʹza·hab. 51 Then Haʹdad died.The sheikhs of Eʹdom were Sheikh Timʹna, Sheikh Alʹvah, Sheikh Jeʹtheth, 52 Sheikh O·hol·i·baʹmah, Sheikh Eʹlah, Sheikh Piʹnon, 53 Sheikh Keʹnaz, Sheikh Teʹman, Sheikh Mibʹzar, 54 Sheikh Magʹdi·el, Sheikh Iʹram. These were the sheikhs of Eʹdom.
10 Re·ho·boʹam went to Sheʹchem, for all Israel had come to Sheʹchem to make him king. 2 As soon as Jer·o·boʹam the son of Neʹbat heard of it (he was still in Egypt because he had fled on account of King Solʹo·mon), Jer·o·boʹam came back from Egypt. 3 Then they sent for him, and Jer·o·boʹam and all Israel came to Re·ho·boʹam and said: 4 “Your father made our yoke harsh. But if you make the harsh service of your father easier and you lighten the heavy yoke he put on us, we will serve you.”5 At this he said to them: “Return to me after three days.” So the people went away. 6 King Re·ho·boʹam then consulted with the older men who had served his father Solʹo·mon while he was alive, saying: “What advice would you give on how to reply to this people?” 7 They answered him: “If you are good to this people and please them and give them a favorable answer, they will always be your servants.”8 However, he rejected the advice that the older men gave him, and he consulted with the young men who had grown up with him and who were now his attendants. 9 He asked them: “What advice do you offer on how we should reply to this people who have said to me, ‘Make the yoke your father put on us lighter’?” 10 The young men who had grown up with him said to him: “This is what you should say to the people who have said to you, ‘Your father made our yoke heavy, but you should make it lighter for us’; this is what you should tell them, ‘My little finger will be thicker than my father’s hips. 11 My father imposed a heavy yoke on you, but I will add to your yoke. My father punished you with whips, but I will do so with scourges.’”12 Jer·o·boʹam and all the people came to Re·ho·boʹam on the third day, just as the king had said: “Return to me on the third day.” 13 But the king answered them harshly. Thus King Re·ho·boʹam rejected the advice of the older men. 14 He spoke to them according to the advice of the young men, saying: “I will make your yoke heavier, and I will add to it. My father punished you with whips, but I will do so with scourges.” 15 So the king did not listen to the people, for this turn of events was caused by the true God, in order to carry out the word that Jehovah had spoken through A·hiʹjah the Shiʹlo·nite to Jer·o·boʹam the son of Neʹbat.16 As for all Israel, because the king refused to listen to them, the people replied to the king: “What share do we have in David? We have no inheritance in the son of Jesʹse. Each one to your gods, O Israel! Now look after your own house, O David.” With that all Israel returned to their homes.17 But Re·ho·boʹam continued to reign over the Israelites living in the cities of Judah.18 Then King Re·ho·boʹam sent Ha·doʹram, who was in charge of those conscripted for forced labor, but the Israelites stoned him to death. King Re·ho·boʹam managed to mount his chariot to flee to Jerusalem. 19 And the Israelites have been in revolt against the house of David down to this day.
11 When Re·ho·boʹam arrived in Jerusalem, he immediately congregated the house of Judah and Benjamin, 180,000 trained warriors, to fight against Israel in order to restore the kingdom to Re·ho·boʹam. 2 Then the word of Jehovah came to She·maiʹah the man of the true God, saying: 3 “Say to Re·ho·boʹam the son of Solʹo·mon the king of Judah and to all Israel in Judah and Benjamin, 4 ‘This is what Jehovah says: “You must not go up and fight against your brothers. Each of you return to his house, for I have caused this to happen.”’” So they obeyed the word of Jehovah and returned and did not go against Jer·o·boʹam.5 Re·ho·boʹam lived in Jerusalem and built fortified cities in Judah. 6 Thus he built up Bethʹle·hem, Eʹtam, Te·koʹa, 7 Beth-zur, Soʹco, A·dulʹlam, 8 Gath, Ma·reʹshah, Ziph, 9 Ad·o·raʹim, Laʹchish, A·zeʹkah, 10 Zoʹrah, Aiʹja·lon, and Hebʹron, fortified cities that were in Judah and Benjamin. 11 Further, he reinforced the fortified places and put commanders in them and supplied them with food and oil and wine, 12 and he supplied all the different cities with large shields and lances; he reinforced them to a very great degree. And Judah and Benjamin remained his.13 And the priests and the Levites who were in all Israel took their stand with him, coming out of all their territories. 14 The Levites left their pastures and their possession and came to Judah and Jerusalem, because Jer·o·boʹam and his sons had dismissed them from serving as priests to Jehovah. 15 Jer·o·boʹam then appointed his own priests for the high places and for the goatlike demons and for the calves that he had made. 16 And those from all the tribes of Israel who had their heart set on seeking Jehovah the God of Israel followed them to Jerusalem to sacrifice to Jehovah the God of their forefathers. 17 For three years they strengthened the kingship of Judah and supported Re·ho·boʹam the son of Solʹo·mon, for they walked in the way of David and Solʹo·mon for three years.18 Then Re·ho·boʹam took as his wife Maʹha·lath the daughter of David’s son Jerʹi·moth and of Abʹi·ha·il the daughter of Jesʹse’s son E·liʹab. 19 In time she bore him sons: Jeʹush, Shem·a·riʹah, and Zaʹham. 20 After her, he married Maʹa·cah the granddaughter of Abʹsa·lom. In time she bore him A·biʹjah, Atʹtai, Ziʹza, and She·loʹmith. 21 Re·ho·boʹam loved Maʹa·cah the granddaughter of Abʹsa·lom more than all his other wives and concubines, for he took 18 wives and 60 concubines, and he became father to 28 sons and 60 daughters. 22 So Re·ho·boʹam appointed A·biʹjah the son of Maʹa·cah as head and leader among his brothers, for he intended to make him king. 23 However, he acted with understanding and sent some of his sons to all the regions of Judah and Benjamin, to all the fortified cities, and gave them abundant provisions and acquired many wives for them.
12 Soon after the kingship of Re·ho·boʹam was firmly established and he had become strong, he abandoned the Law of Jehovah, and also all Israel with him. 2 In the fifth year of King Re·ho·boʹam, King Shiʹshak of Egypt came up against Jerusalem, for they had behaved unfaithfully toward Jehovah. 3 He had 1,200 chariots, 60,000 horsemen, and countless troops who came with him from Egypt—Libʹy·ans, Sukʹki·im, and E·thi·oʹpi·ans. 4 He captured the fortified cities of Judah and finally reached Jerusalem.5 She·maiʹah the prophet came to Re·ho·boʹam and the princes of Judah who had gathered at Jerusalem because of Shiʹshak, and he said to them: “This is what Jehovah says, ‘You have abandoned me, so I have also abandoned you to the hand of Shiʹshak.’” 6 At that the princes of Israel and the king humbled themselves and said: “Jehovah is righteous.” 7 When Jehovah saw that they had humbled themselves, the word of Jehovah came to She·maiʹah, saying: “They have humbled themselves. I will not destroy them, and in a little while I will rescue them. I will not pour out my wrath on Jerusalem through Shiʹshak. 8 But they will become his servants, so that they will know the difference between serving me and serving the kings of other lands.”9 So King Shiʹshak of Egypt came up against Jerusalem. He took the treasures of the house of Jehovah and the treasures of the king’s house. He took everything, including the gold shields that Solʹo·mon had made. 10 So King Re·ho·boʹam made copper shields to replace them, and he entrusted them to the chiefs of the guard, who guarded the entrance of the king’s house. 11 Whenever the king came to the house of Jehovah, the guards would come in and carry them, and then they would return them to the guard chamber. 12 Because the king humbled himself, Jehovah’s anger turned away from him, and he did not destroy them completely. Moreover, there were some good things found in Judah.13 King Re·ho·boʹam strengthened his position in Jerusalem and continued to reign; Re·ho·boʹam was 41 years old when he became king, and he reigned for 17 years in Jerusalem, the city that Jehovah had chosen out of all the tribes of Israel as the place to put his name. The name of the king’s mother was Naʹa·mah the Amʹmon·it·ess. 14 But he did what was bad, for he had not resolved in his heart to search for Jehovah.15 As for Re·ho·boʹam’s history, from beginning to end, is it not written among the words of She·maiʹah the prophet and of Idʹdo the visionary in the genealogical record? And there were constant wars between Re·ho·boʹam and Jer·o·boʹam. 16 Then Re·ho·boʹam was laid to rest with his forefathers and was buried in the City of David; and his son A·biʹjah became king in his place.
13 In the 18th year of King Jer·o·boʹam, A·biʹjah became king over Judah. 2 He reigned for three years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Mi·caiʹah the daughter of U·riʹel of Gibʹe·ah. And there was war between A·biʹjah and Jer·o·boʹam.3 So A·biʹjah went to war with an army of 400,000 mighty, trained warriors. And Jer·o·boʹam drew up in battle formation against him with 800,000 trained men, mighty warriors. 4 A·biʹjah now stood on Mount Zem·a·raʹim, which is in the mountainous region of Eʹphra·im, and said: “Hear me, O Jer·o·boʹam and all Israel. 5 Do you not know that Jehovah the God of Israel gave to David a kingdom over Israel forever, to him and to his sons, by a covenant of salt? 6 But Jer·o·boʹam the son of Neʹbat, the servant of David’s son Solʹo·mon, rose up and rebelled against his lord. 7 And idle, worthless men kept gathering to him. And they proved superior to Re·ho·boʹam the son of Solʹo·mon when Re·ho·boʹam was young and fainthearted, and he could not hold his own against them.8 “And now you think you can hold your own against the kingdom of Jehovah in the hand of the sons of David because you are a large crowd and you have the golden calves that Jer·o·boʹam made as gods for you. 9 Have you not driven out Jehovah’s priests, the descendants of Aaron, and the Levites, and have you not appointed your own priests just like the peoples of the other lands? Anyone who came along with a young bull and seven rams could become a priest of what are not gods. 10 As for us, Jehovah is our God, and we have not abandoned him; our priests, the descendants of Aaron, are ministering to Jehovah, and the Levites assist in the work. 11 They are making burnt offerings smoke to Jehovah each morning and each evening along with perfumed incense, and the layer bread is on the table of pure gold, and they light up the golden lampstand and its lamps each evening, because we are caring for our responsibility to Jehovah our God; but you have abandoned him. 12 Now look! the true God is with us, leading us, with his priests and the signal trumpets for sounding the battle alarm against you. O men of Israel, do not fight against Jehovah the God of your forefathers, for you will not be successful.”13 But Jer·o·boʹam dispatched an ambush to come from behind them, so that they were in front of Judah and the ambush was behind them. 14 When the men of Judah turned around, they saw that they had to fight the battle both in front and from behind. So they began to cry out to Jehovah, while the priests were loudly sounding the trumpets. 15 The men of Judah broke out in a war cry, and when the men of Judah shouted the war cry, the true God defeated Jer·o·boʹam and all Israel before A·biʹjah and Judah. 16 The Israelites fled before Judah, and God gave them into their hand. 17 A·biʹjah and his people inflicted a great slaughter on them, and the slain of Israel kept falling, 500,000 trained men. 18 Thus the men of Israel were humbled at that time, but the men of Judah proved superior because they relied on Jehovah the God of their forefathers. 19 A·biʹjah kept chasing after Jer·o·boʹam and captured cities from him, Bethʹel and its dependent towns, Jeshʹa·nah and its dependent towns, and Eʹphra·in and its dependent towns. 20 And Jer·o·boʹam never regained his power during the time of A·biʹjah; then Jehovah struck him down and he died.21 But A·biʹjah grew in strength. In time he took 14 wives, and he became father to 22 sons and 16 daughters. 22 And the rest of A·biʹjah’s history, his deeds and his words, is recorded in the writings of the prophet Idʹdo.
14 Then A·biʹjah was laid to rest with his forefathers, and they buried him in the City of David; and his son Aʹsa became king in his place. In his days the land had rest for ten years.2 Aʹsa did what was good and right in the eyes of Jehovah his God. 3 He removed the foreign altars and the high places, smashed the sacred pillars, and cut down the sacred poles. 4 Further, he told Judah to search for Jehovah the God of their forefathers and to observe the Law and the commandment. 5 So he removed from all the cities of Judah the high places and the incense stands, and under him, the kingdom continued without disturbance. 6 He built fortified cities in Judah, since the land had no disturbance and there was no war against him during these years, for Jehovah gave him rest. 7 He said to Judah: “Let us build these cities and surround them with walls and towers, gates and bars. For the land is still at our disposal, because we have searched for Jehovah our God. We have searched, and he has given us rest all around.” So their building was successful.8 Aʹsa had an army of 300,000 men from Judah, equipped with large shields and lances. And out of Benjamin were 280,000 mighty warriors who carried bucklers and were armed with bows.9 Later Zeʹrah the E·thi·oʹpi·an came against them with an army of 1,000,000 men and 300 chariots. When he reached Ma·reʹshah, 10 Aʹsa went out against him and they drew up in battle formation in the Valley of Zephʹa·thah at Ma·reʹshah. 11 Aʹsa then called to Jehovah his God and said: “O Jehovah, it does not matter to you whether those you help are many or have no power. Help us, O Jehovah our God, for we are relying on you, and in your name we have come against this crowd. O Jehovah, you are our God. Do not let mortal man prevail against you.”12 So Jehovah defeated the E·thi·oʹpi·ans before Aʹsa and before Judah, and the E·thi·oʹpi·ans fled. 13 Aʹsa and the people with him pursued them as far as Geʹrar, and the E·thi·oʹpi·ans continued falling until not one of them was alive, for they were crushed by Jehovah and by his army. Afterward they carried off a very great deal of spoil. 14 Further, they struck all the cities around Geʹrar, for the dread of Jehovah had come upon them; and they plundered all the cities, for there was much to plunder in them. 15 They also attacked the tents of those with livestock, and they captured a great number of flocks and camels, after which they returned to Jerusalem.
15 Now the spirit of God came upon Az·a·riʹah the son of Oʹded. 2 So he went out to meet Aʹsa and said to him: “Hear me, O Aʹsa and all Judah and Benjamin! Jehovah is with you as long as you remain with him; and if you search for him, he will let himself be found by you, but if you abandon him, he will abandon you. 3 For a long time Israel had been without the true God, without a priest teaching, and without law. 4 But when in their distress they returned to Jehovah the God of Israel and searched for him, he let himself be found by them. 5 In those times no one could travel safely, for there was much unrest among all the inhabitants of the lands. 6 Nation was being crushed by nation and one city by another city, because God kept them in disorder with every sort of distress. 7 But you, be strong and do not become discouraged, for your activity will be rewarded.”8 As soon as Aʹsa heard these words and the prophecy of Oʹded the prophet, he took courage and removed the disgusting idols from all the land of Judah and Benjamin and from the cities that he had captured from the mountainous region of Eʹphra·im, and he restored Jehovah’s altar that was before the porch of Jehovah. 9 And he gathered together all Judah and Benjamin and the foreign residents with them from Eʹphra·im and Ma·nasʹseh and Simʹe·on, for they had deserted to him from Israel in great number when they saw that Jehovah his God was with him. 10 So they were gathered together at Jerusalem in the third month of the 15th year of Aʹsa’s reign. 11 On that day they sacrificed to Jehovah from the spoil they had brought, 700 cattle and 7,000 sheep. 12 Furthermore, they entered into a covenant to search for Jehovah the God of their forefathers with all their heart and with all their soul. 13 Whoever would not search for Jehovah the God of Israel was to be put to death, whether small or great, man or woman. 14 So they took an oath to Jehovah with a loud voice, with joyful shouting, and with the trumpets and horns. 15 And all Judah rejoiced over the oath, for they had taken the oath with all their heart and they eagerly sought him and he let himself be found by them, and Jehovah continued to give them rest on every side.16 Aʹsa the king even removed Maʹa·cah his grandmother from her position as queen mother, because she had made an obscene idol for the worship of the sacred pole. Aʹsa cut down her obscene idol and pulverized it and burned it in the Kidʹron Valley. 17 But the high places were not removed from Israel. Nevertheless, Aʹsa’s heart was complete all his life. 18 And he brought the things that he and his father had made holy into the house of the true God—silver, gold, and various utensils. 19 There was no war until the 35th year of Aʹsa’s reign.
16 In the 36th year of the reign of Aʹsa, King Baʹa·sha of Israel came up against Judah and began to build up Raʹmah to prevent anyone from going out or coming in to King Aʹsa of Judah. 2 At that Aʹsa brought out silver and gold from the treasuries of Jehovah’s house and the king’s house and sent them to King Ben-haʹdad of Syria, who was dwelling in Damascus, saying: 3 “There is a treaty between me and you and between my father and your father. I am sending you silver and gold. Come, break your treaty with King Baʹa·sha of Israel, so that he will withdraw from me.”4 Ben-haʹdad listened to King Aʹsa and sent the chiefs of his armies against the cities of Israel, and they struck down Iʹjon, Dan, Aʹbel-maʹim, and all the storage places of the cities of Naphʹta·li. 5 When Baʹa·sha heard of it, he immediately quit building Raʹmah and abandoned his work on it. 6 King Aʹsa then took all Judah, and they carried off the stones and timbers of Raʹmah that Baʹa·sha had been building with, and with them he built up Geʹba and Mizʹpah.7 At that time Ha·naʹni the seer came to King Aʹsa of Judah and said to him: “Because you relied on the king of Syria and did not rely on Jehovah your God, the army of the king of Syria has escaped out of your hand. 8 Were not the E·thi·oʹpi·ans and the Libʹy·ans a very great army with many chariots and horsemen? But because you relied on Jehovah, he gave them into your hand. 9 For the eyes of Jehovah are roving about through all the earth to show his strength in behalf of those whose heart is complete toward him. You have acted foolishly in this matter; from now on there will be wars against you.”10 However, Aʹsa became offended at the seer and put him in prison because he was enraged at him over this. And Aʹsa began to mistreat others among the people at that same time. 11 Now the history of Aʹsa, from beginning to end, is written in the Book of the Kings of Judah and of Israel.12 In the 39th year of his reign, Aʹsa developed an ailment in his feet until he became very sick; and even in his sickness, he turned, not to Jehovah, but to the healers. 13 Then Aʹsa was laid to rest with his forefathers; he died in the 41st year of his reign. 14 So they buried him in the grand burial place that he had excavated for himself in the City of David, and they laid him on a bier that had been filled with balsam oil and different sorts of ingredients mixed into a specially made ointment. Further, they made an extraordinarily great funeral burning for him.
17 And his son Je·hoshʹa·phat became king in his place, and he strengthened his position over Israel. 2 He stationed military forces in all the fortified cities of Judah and put garrisons in the land of Judah and in the cities of Eʹphra·im that Aʹsa his father had captured. 3 Jehovah continued with Je·hoshʹa·phat because he walked in the former ways of his forefather David and did not search for the Baʹals. 4 For he searched for the God of his father and followed his commandment and not the practices of Israel. 5 Jehovah kept the kingdom firmly established in his hand; and all Judah continued to give gifts to Je·hoshʹa·phat, and he had riches and glory in abundance. 6 His heart became bold in the ways of Jehovah, and he even removed the high places and the sacred poles from Judah.7 In the third year of his reign he sent for his princes, Ben-haʹil, O·ba·diʹah, Zech·a·riʹah, Ne·thanʹel, and Mi·caiʹah, to teach in the cities of Judah. 8 There were Levites with them: She·maiʹah, Neth·a·niʹah, Zeb·a·diʹah, Asʹa·hel, She·mirʹa·moth, Je·honʹa·than, Ad·o·niʹjah, To·biʹjah, and Tob-ad·o·niʹjah, and along with them E·lishʹa·ma and Je·hoʹram the priests. 9 They began teaching in Judah, taking with them the book of Jehovah’s Law, and they went around through all the cities of Judah teaching among the people.10 And the dread of Jehovah came upon all the kingdoms of the lands surrounding Judah, and they did not fight against Je·hoshʹa·phat. 11 And the Phi·lisʹtines brought to Je·hoshʹa·phat gifts and money as tribute. The Arabs brought him 7,700 rams and 7,700 male goats from their flocks.12 Je·hoshʹa·phat grew greater and greater, and he continued building fortified places and storage cities in Judah. 13 He carried out extensive projects in the cities of Judah, and he had soldiers, mighty warriors, in Jerusalem. 14 These were grouped by their paternal houses: of Judah the chiefs of thousands, Adʹnah the chief, and with him were 300,000 mighty warriors. 15 And under his command was Je·ho·haʹnan the chief, and with him were 280,000. 16 And also under his command was Am·a·siʹah the son of Zichʹri, who volunteered for Jehovah’s service, and with him were 200,000 mighty warriors. 17 And out of Benjamin was E·liʹa·da, a mighty warrior, and with him were 200,000 men equipped with the bow and shield. 18 And under his command was Je·hozʹa·bad, and with him were 180,000 men equipped for the army. 19 These were ministering to the king in addition to those whom the king put in the fortified cities throughout all Judah.
18 Je·hoshʹa·phat had riches and glory in abundance, but he made a marriage alliance with Aʹhab. 2 So years later he went down to Aʹhab at Sa·marʹi·a, and Aʹhab sacrificed sheep and cattle in abundance for him and for the people with him. And he urged him to go up against Raʹmoth-gilʹe·ad. 3 Then King Aʹhab of Israel said to King Je·hoshʹa·phat of Judah: “Will you go with me to Raʹmoth-gilʹe·ad?” He replied to him: “I am the same as you, and my people are the same as your people and will support you in the war.”4 But Je·hoshʹa·phat said to the king of Israel: “First inquire, please, for the word of Jehovah.” 5 So the king of Israel gathered the prophets together, 400 men, and said to them: “Should we go to war against Raʹmoth-gilʹe·ad, or should I refrain?” They said: “Go up, and the true God will give it into the king’s hand.”6 Je·hoshʹa·phat then said: “Is there not here a prophet of Jehovah? Let us also inquire through him.” 7 At that the king of Israel said to Je·hoshʹa·phat: “There is still one more man through whom we can inquire of Jehovah; but I hate him, for he never prophesies good things concerning me, but always bad. He is Mi·caiʹah the son of Imʹlah.” However, Je·hoshʹa·phat said: “The king should not say such a thing.”8 So the king of Israel called a court official and said: “Bring Mi·caiʹah the son of Imʹlah quickly.” 9 Now the king of Israel and Je·hoshʹa·phat the king of Judah were each sitting on his throne, dressed in royal attire; they were sitting at the threshing floor at the entrance of the gate of Sa·marʹi·a, and all the prophets were prophesying before them. 10 Then Zed·e·kiʹah the son of Che·naʹa·nah made for himself iron horns and said: “This is what Jehovah says, ‘With these you will gore the Syrians until you exterminate them.’” 11 All the other prophets were prophesying the same way, saying: “Go up to Raʹmoth-gilʹe·ad and you will be successful; Jehovah will give it into the king’s hand.”12 So the messenger who went to call Mi·caiʹah said to him: “Look! The words of the prophets are unanimously favorable to the king. Let your word, please, become like theirs, and speak favorably.” 13 But Mi·caiʹah said: “As surely as Jehovah is living, whatever my God says is what I will speak.” 14 Then he came in to the king, and the king asked him: “Mi·caiʹah, should we go to war against Raʹmoth-gilʹe·ad, or should I refrain?” At once he replied: “Go up and you will be successful; they will be given into your hand.” 15 At that the king said to him: “How many times must I put you under oath not to speak to me anything but the truth in the name of Jehovah?” 16 So he said: “I see all the Israelites scattered on the mountains, like sheep that have no shepherd. Jehovah said: ‘These have no master. Let each one go back to his house in peace.’”17 Then the king of Israel said to Je·hoshʹa·phat: “Did I not tell you, ‘He will not prophesy good things concerning me, only bad’?”18 Mi·caiʹah then said: “Therefore, hear the word of Jehovah: I saw Jehovah sitting on his throne and all the army of the heavens standing at his right and at his left. 19 Jehovah then said, ‘Who will fool King Aʹhab of Israel, so that he will go up and fall at Raʹmoth-gilʹe·ad?’ And one was saying one thing while another said something else. 20 Then a spirit came forward and stood before Jehovah and said, ‘I will fool him.’ Jehovah asked him, ‘How will you do it?’ 21 He replied, ‘I will go out and become a deceptive spirit in the mouth of all his prophets.’ So he said, ‘You will fool him, and what is more, you will be successful. Go out and do that.’ 22 And now Jehovah has put a deceptive spirit in the mouth of these prophets of yours, but Jehovah has declared calamity for you.”23 Zed·e·kiʹah the son of Che·naʹa·nah now approached and struck Mi·caiʹah on the cheek and said: “Which way did the spirit of Jehovah pass from me to speak with you?” 24 Mi·caiʹah replied: “Look! You will see which way on the day when you will enter the innermost room to hide.” 25 Then the king of Israel said: “Take Mi·caiʹah and turn him over to Aʹmon the chief of the city and to Joʹash the king’s son. 26 Tell them, ‘This is what the king says: “Put this fellow in the prison and feed him with a reduced allowance of bread and water until I return in peace.”’” 27 But Mi·caiʹah said: “If you do return in peace, Jehovah has not spoken with me.” Then he added: “Take note, all you peoples.”28 So the king of Israel and Je·hoshʹa·phat the king of Judah went up to Raʹmoth-gilʹe·ad. 29 The king of Israel now said to Je·hoshʹa·phat: “I will disguise myself and will go into the battle, but you should put on your royal attire.” So the king of Israel disguised himself, and they entered the battle. 30 Now the king of Syria had ordered his chariot commanders: “Do not fight with anyone, small or great, except the king of Israel.” 31 And as soon as the chariot commanders saw Je·hoshʹa·phat, they said to themselves: “It is the king of Israel.” So they turned to fight against him; and Je·hoshʹa·phat began to cry for help, and Jehovah helped him, and God at once diverted them from him. 32 When the chariot commanders saw that it was not the king of Israel, they immediately turned back from following him.33 But one man shot his bow at random, and he struck the king of Israel between the joints of his coat of mail. So the king said to his charioteer: “Turn around and take me out of the battle, for I have been badly wounded.” 34 The fighting raged throughout that day, and the king of Israel had to be propped up in the chariot, facing the Syrians until the evening; and he died at sunset.
19 Then King Je·hoshʹa·phat of Judah returned safely to his own house in Jerusalem. 2 Jeʹhu the son of Ha·naʹni the visionary went out to meet him and said to King Je·hoshʹa·phat: “Is it the wicked you should be helping, and is it those who hate Jehovah you should love? Because of this the indignation of Jehovah is against you. 3 Nevertheless, there are good things that have been found in you, because you cleared out the sacred poles from the land and you have prepared your heart to search for the true God.”4 Je·hoshʹa·phat continued living in Jerusalem, and he went out again among the people from Beʹer-sheʹba to the mountainous region of Eʹphra·im, to bring them back to Jehovah the God of their forefathers. 5 He also appointed judges throughout the land in all the fortified cities of Judah, city by city. 6 And he said to the judges: “Pay attention to what you are doing, for you do not judge for man but for Jehovah, and he is with you when you pass judgment. 7 Now let the fear of Jehovah be upon you. Be careful about what you do, for with Jehovah our God there is no injustice, no partiality, no bribe-taking.”8 In Jerusalem also, Je·hoshʹa·phat appointed some of the Levites and the priests and some of the heads of the paternal houses of Israel to serve as judges for Jehovah and to settle legal cases for the inhabitants of Jerusalem. 9 And he commanded them: “This is what you should do in the fear of Jehovah, with faithfulness and a complete heart: 10 Whenever your brothers living in their cities bring a legal case that involves the shedding of blood or a question about a law, a commandment, regulations, or judgments, you should warn them so that they may not become guilty before Jehovah; otherwise his indignation will come against you and your brothers. This is what you should do, so that you may not incur guilt. 11 Here is Am·a·riʹah the chief priest who is over you for every matter of Jehovah. Zeb·a·diʹah the son of Ishʹma·el is the leader of the house of Judah for every matter pertaining to the king. And the Levites will serve as officers for you. Be strong and act, and let Jehovah be with those who do what is good.”
2 Solʹo·mon now gave the order to build a house for Jehovah’s name and a house for his kingdom. 2 Solʹo·mon enlisted 70,000 men as common laborers, 80,000 men as stonecutters in the mountains, and 3,600 as overseers over them. 3 Further, Solʹo·mon sent word to Hiʹram the king of Tyre: “Do for me as you did for David my father when you sent him cedarwood to build a house to live in. 4 Now I am building a house for the name of Jehovah my God, to sanctify it to him, to burn perfumed incense before him, and also for the constant layer bread and the burnt offerings, morning and evening, on the Sabbaths, on the new moons, and at the festival seasons of Jehovah our God. This is a lasting obligation for Israel. 5 The house that I am building will be great, for our God is greater than all the other gods. 6 And who is up to the task of building him a house? For the heavens and the heaven of the heavens cannot contain him, so who am I that I should build him a house except as a place for making sacrifices smoke before him? 7 Now send me a craftsman who is skilled in working in gold, silver, copper, iron, purple wool, crimson, and blue thread and who knows how to cut engravings. He will work in Judah and in Jerusalem with my skilled craftsmen, whom David my father has provided. 8 And send me timbers of cedar, juniper, and algum from Lebʹa·non, for I well know that your servants are experienced at cutting down the trees of Lebʹa·non. My servants will work along with your servants 9 to prepare for me great quantities of timber, for the house that I am to build will be extraordinarily great. 10 Now look! I will supply the food for your servants, the woodcutters who cut down the trees: 20,000 cors of wheat, 20,000 cors of barley, 20,000 baths of wine, and 20,000 baths of oil.”11 At that Hiʹram the king of Tyre sent this written message to Solʹo·mon: “Because Jehovah loves his people, he has made you their king.” 12 Hiʹram then said: “May Jehovah the God of Israel be praised, who made the heavens and the earth, because he has given to King David a wise son, endowed with discretion and understanding, who will build a house for Jehovah and a house for his kingdom. 13 Now I am sending a skilled craftsman, endowed with understanding, Hiʹram-aʹbi, 14 who is the son of a Danʹite woman but whose father was a man of Tyre; he has experience in working in gold, silver, copper, iron, stones, timbers, purple wool, blue thread, fine fabric, and crimson. He can do every sort of engraving and make any design he is given. He will work with your own skilled craftsmen and the skilled craftsmen of my lord David your father. 15 Now let my lord send the wheat, barley, oil, and wine he has promised to his servants. 16 And we will cut down trees from Lebʹa·non, as many as you need, and we will bring them to you as rafts by sea to Jopʹpa; and you will take them up to Jerusalem.”17 Solʹo·mon then took a count of all the men who were foreign residents in the land of Israel, after the census taken by David his father, and there were found 153,600. 18 So he assigned 70,000 of them as common laborers, 80,000 as stonecutters in the mountains, and 3,600 as overseers for putting the people to work.
20 Afterward the Moʹab·ites and the Amʹmon·ites, together with some of the Amʹmon·im, came to wage war against Je·hoshʹa·phat. 2 So Je·hoshʹa·phat was told: “A large crowd has come against you from the region of the sea, from Eʹdom, and there they are in Hazʹa·zon-taʹmar, that is, En-gedʹi.” 3 At that Je·hoshʹa·phat became afraid, and he resolved to search for Jehovah. So he proclaimed a fast for all Judah. 4 The people of Judah then gathered together to inquire of Jehovah; they came from all the cities of Judah to consult Jehovah.5 Then Je·hoshʹa·phat stood up in the congregation of Judah and Jerusalem in the house of Jehovah before the new courtyard, 6 and he said:“O Jehovah the God of our forefathers, are you not God in the heavens; do you not have dominion over all the kingdoms of the nations? In your hand are power and might, and no one can stand against you. 7 O our God, did you not drive away the inhabitants of this land from before your people Israel and then give it as a lasting possession to the offspring of your friend Abraham? 8 And they settled in it, and they built for you there a sanctuary for your name, saying, 9 ‘If disaster should come on us, whether by sword, adverse judgment, pestilence, or famine, let us stand before this house and before you (for your name is in this house) and call to you for help out of our distress, and may you hear and save us.’ 10 Now here are the men of Amʹmon, Moʹab, and the mountainous region of Seʹir, whom you did not allow Israel to invade when they came out of the land of Egypt. They turned away from them and did not annihilate them. 11 Now they are repaying us by coming in to drive us out from your possession that you gave us as an inheritance. 12 O our God, will you not execute judgment on them? For we are powerless before this large crowd that is coming against us; and we do not know what we should do, but our eyes are toward you.”13 Meanwhile, all those of Judah were standing before Jehovah, along with their little ones, their wives, and their children.14 Then in the middle of the congregation, the spirit of Jehovah came upon Ja·ha·ziʹel son of Zech·a·riʹah son of Be·naiʹah son of Je·iʹel son of Mat·ta·niʹah the Levite of the sons of Aʹsaph. 15 He said: “Pay attention, all Judah and you inhabitants of Jerusalem and King Je·hoshʹa·phat! Here is what Jehovah says to you, ‘Do not be afraid or be terrified because of this large crowd, for the battle is not yours but God’s. 16 Tomorrow go down against them. They will be coming up by the pass of Ziz, and you will find them at the end of the valley before the wilderness of Je·ruʹel. 17 You will not need to fight this battle. Take your position, stand still, and see the salvation of Jehovah in your behalf. O Judah and Jerusalem, do not be afraid or be terrified. Tomorrow go out against them, and Jehovah will be with you.’”18 At once Je·hoshʹa·phat bowed low with his face to the ground, and all Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem fell down before Jehovah to worship Jehovah. 19 Then the Levites who were descendants of the Koʹhath·ites and the Korʹah·ites rose up to praise Jehovah the God of Israel with a very loud voice.20 They rose up early the next morning and went out to the wilderness of Te·koʹa. As they went out, Je·hoshʹa·phat stood up and said: “Listen to me, O Judah and you inhabitants of Jerusalem! Put faith in Jehovah your God so that you may be able to stand firm. Put faith in his prophets, and you will be successful.”21 After he consulted with the people, he appointed men to sing to Jehovah and to offer praise in holy adornment as they went out ahead of the armed men, saying: “Give thanks to Jehovah, for his loyal love endures forever.”22 When they began joyfully singing praises, Jehovah set an ambush against the men of Amʹmon, Moʹab, and the mountainous region of Seʹir who were invading Judah, and they struck each other down. 23 And the Amʹmon·ites and the Moʹab·ites turned against the inhabitants of the mountainous region of Seʹir to destroy and annihilate them; and when they finished with the inhabitants of Seʹir, they helped to destroy one another.24 But when Judah came to the watchtower of the wilderness and looked toward the crowd, there they saw their carcasses fallen to the ground; there were no survivors. 25 So Je·hoshʹa·phat and his people came to carry off the spoil from them, and they found among them an abundance of goods, clothing, and desirable articles, which they stripped off for themselves until they could carry no more. It took three days to carry off the spoil, for it was abundant. 26 On the fourth day they congregated together at the Valley of Berʹa·cah, for there they praised Jehovah. That is why they named that place Valley of Berʹa·cah—until today.27 Then all the men of Judah and Jerusalem, with Je·hoshʹa·phat at their head, returned to Jerusalem with rejoicing, for Jehovah had made them rejoice over their enemies. 28 So they came into Jerusalem with stringed instruments, harps, and trumpets and went to the house of Jehovah. 29 And the dread of God came upon all the kingdoms of the lands when they heard that Jehovah had fought against the enemies of Israel. 30 Thus the kingdom of Je·hoshʹa·phat had no disturbance, and his God continued to give him rest on every side.31 And Je·hoshʹa·phat continued reigning over Judah. He was 35 years old when he became king, and he reigned for 25 years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was A·zuʹbah the daughter of Shilʹhi. 32 He kept walking in the way of his father Aʹsa. He did not deviate from it, and he did what was right in Jehovah’s eyes. 33 However, the high places were not removed, and the people had not yet prepared their heart for the God of their forefathers.34 As for the rest of the history of Je·hoshʹa·phat, from beginning to end, there it is written among the words of Jeʹhu the son of Ha·naʹni, which were included in the Book of the Kings of Israel. 35 After this King Je·hoshʹa·phat of Judah made an alliance with King A·ha·ziʹah of Israel, who acted wickedly. 36 So he made him his partner in making ships to go to Tarʹshish, and they built the ships in Eʹzi·on-geʹber. 37 However, E·li·eʹzer the son of Dod·avʹa·hu of Ma·reʹsha spoke prophetically against Je·hoshʹa·phat, saying: “Because you have made an alliance with A·ha·ziʹah, Jehovah will destroy your works.” So the ships were wrecked, and they were unable to go to Tarʹshish.
21 Then Je·hoshʹa·phat was laid to rest with his forefathers and was buried with his forefathers in the City of David; and his son Je·hoʹram became king in his place. 2 His brothers, Je·hoshʹa·phat’s sons, were Az·a·riʹah, Je·hiʹel, Zech·a·riʹah, Az·a·riʹah, Miʹcha·el, and Sheph·a·tiʹah; all of these were the sons of King Je·hoshʹa·phat of Israel. 3 And their father had given them many gifts in silver and gold, and valuable things, along with fortified cities in Judah; but he gave the kingdom to Je·hoʹram, for he was the firstborn.4 When Je·hoʹram had taken control of the kingdom of his father, he strengthened his position by killing all his brothers with the sword, as well as some of the princes of Israel. 5 Je·hoʹram was 32 years old when he became king, and he reigned for eight years in Jerusalem. 6 He walked in the way of the kings of Israel, just as those of the house of Aʹhab had done, for Aʹhab’s daughter had become his wife; and he kept doing what was bad in Jehovah’s eyes. 7 But Jehovah did not want to bring the house of David to ruin for the sake of the covenant that he had made with David, since he had promised to give a lamp to him and to his sons always.8 In his days Eʹdom revolted against Judah and then set up its own king. 9 So Je·hoʹram and his commanders crossed over with all his chariots, and he rose up by night and defeated the Eʹdom·ites who were surrounding him and the chariot commanders. 10 But Eʹdom has kept up its revolt against Judah to this day. Libʹnah also revolted against him at that time, because he had abandoned Jehovah the God of his forefathers. 11 He had also made high places on the mountains of Judah to cause the inhabitants of Jerusalem to commit spiritual prostitution, and he led Judah astray.12 Eventually a written message came to him from E·liʹjah the prophet, saying: “This is what Jehovah the God of David your forefather says, ‘You have not walked in the ways of your father Je·hoshʹa·phat or in the ways of King Aʹsa of Judah. 13 But you walk in the way of the kings of Israel and cause Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem to commit spiritual prostitution like the prostitution of the house of Aʹhab, and you even killed your own brothers, the household of your father, who were better than you. 14 Therefore, Jehovah is dealing a great blow to your people, to your sons, to your wives, and to all your possessions. 15 And you will suffer with many sicknesses, including a disease of your intestines, until your intestines come out because of the disease, day after day.’”16 Then Jehovah stirred up against Je·hoʹram the Phi·lisʹtines and the Arabs who were near the E·thi·oʹpi·ans. 17 So they invaded Judah, forcing their way in, and carried off all the possessions that were found in the king’s house, as well as his sons and his wives; and the only son left to him was Je·hoʹa·haz, his youngest son. 18 And after all of this, Jehovah afflicted him with an incurable disease in his intestines. 19 Some time later, when two full years had passed, his intestines came out because of his disease, and he died while suffering severely from his disease; and his people did not make a burning for him like the burning that was made for his forefathers. 20 He was 32 years old when he became king, and he reigned for eight years in Jerusalem. No one regretted it when he died. So they buried him in the City of David, but not in the burial places of the kings.
22 Then the inhabitants of Jerusalem made his youngest son A·ha·ziʹah king in his place, for the marauder band that came with the Arabs to the camp had killed all the older ones. So A·ha·ziʹah the son of Je·hoʹram began to reign as king of Judah. 2 A·ha·ziʹah was 22 years old when he became king, and he reigned for one year in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Ath·a·liʹah the granddaughter of Omʹri.3 He too walked in the ways of the house of Aʹhab, for his mother became his adviser in acting wickedly. 4 And he kept doing what was bad in Jehovah’s eyes, like the house of Aʹhab, for they became his advisers after the death of his father, to his destruction. 5 He followed their advice and went with Je·hoʹram the son of King Aʹhab of Israel to wage war against King Hazʹa·el of Syria at Raʹmoth-gilʹe·ad, where the archers wounded Je·hoʹram. 6 He returned to Jezʹre·el to recover from the wounds that they had inflicted on him at Raʹmah when he fought against King Hazʹa·el of Syria.A·ha·ziʹah the son of Je·hoʹram the king of Judah went down to Jezʹre·el to see Je·hoʹram the son of Aʹhab, because he had been wounded. 7 But God brought about the downfall of A·ha·ziʹah by his coming to Je·hoʹram; and when he came, he went out with Je·hoʹram to meet Jeʹhu the grandson of Nimʹshi, whom Jehovah had anointed to do away with the house of Aʹhab. 8 When Jeʹhu began to execute judgment on the house of Aʹhab, he found the princes of Judah and the sons of A·ha·ziʹah’s brothers, ministers of A·ha·ziʹah, and he killed them. 9 Then he looked for A·ha·ziʹah; they captured him where he was hiding in Sa·marʹi·a, and they brought him to Jeʹhu. Then they put him to death and buried him, for they said: “He is the grandson of Je·hoshʹa·phat, who searched for Jehovah with all his heart.” There was no one of the house of A·ha·ziʹah who had the power to rule the kingdom.10 When Ath·a·liʹah, A·ha·ziʹah’s mother, saw that her son had died, she rose up and destroyed the entire royal line of the house of Judah. 11 However, Je·ho·shabʹe·ath the daughter of the king took Je·hoʹash the son of A·ha·ziʹah and stole him away from among the sons of the king who were to be put to death, and she put him and his nurse in an inner bedroom. Je·ho·shabʹe·ath the daughter of King Je·hoʹram (she was the wife of Je·hoiʹa·da the priest and a sister of A·ha·ziʹah) managed to keep him concealed from Ath·a·liʹah, so that she did not put him to death. 12 He remained with them for six years, hidden at the house of the true God, while Ath·a·liʹah was ruling over the land.
23 In the seventh year, Je·hoiʹa·da acted courageously and made a pact with the chiefs of hundreds, namely, Az·a·riʹah the son of Je·roʹham, Ishʹma·el the son of Je·ho·haʹnan, Az·a·riʹah the son of Oʹbed, Ma·a·seiʹah the son of A·daiʹah, and E·li·shaʹphat the son of Zichʹri. 2 Then they went throughout Judah and gathered together the Levites from all the cities of Judah and the heads of the paternal houses of Israel. When they came to Jerusalem, 3 the entire congregation made a covenant with the king in the house of the true God, after which he said to them:“Look! The king’s son will reign, just as Jehovah promised concerning the sons of David. 4 This is what you are to do: One third of the priests and of the Levites who will be on duty on the Sabbath will be doorkeepers; 5 another third will be at the house of the king, and the other third will be at the Gate of the Foundation, and all the people will be in the courtyards of the house of Jehovah. 6 Do not let anyone enter the house of Jehovah except the priests and the Levites who are ministering. These may enter because they are a holy group, and all the people will keep the obligation to Jehovah. 7 The Levites must surround the king on every side, each with his weapons in hand. Anyone entering the house will be put to death. Stay with the king wherever he goes.”8 The Levites and all Judah did exactly what Je·hoiʹa·da the priest had commanded. So each one took his men who were on duty on the Sabbath, together with those who were off duty on the Sabbath, for Je·hoiʹa·da the priest had not dismissed the divisions from their duty. 9 Je·hoiʹa·da the priest then gave the chiefs of hundreds the spears and the bucklers and the circular shields that had belonged to King David, which were in the house of the true God. 10 He then stationed all the people, each with his weapon in hand, from the right side of the house to the left side of the house, by the altar and by the house, all around the king. 11 Then they brought the king’s son out and put on him the crown and the Testimony and made him king, and Je·hoiʹa·da and his sons anointed him. Then they said: “Long live the king!”12 When Ath·a·liʹah heard the sound of the people running and praising the king, she immediately came to the people at the house of Jehovah. 13 Then she saw the king standing there by his pillar at the entrance. The princes and the trumpeters were with the king, and all the people of the land were rejoicing and blowing the trumpets, and the singers with musical instruments were leading the praises. At this Ath·a·liʹah ripped her garments apart and cried out: “Conspiracy! Conspiracy!” 14 But Je·hoiʹa·da the priest brought out the chiefs of hundreds, those appointed over the army, and said to them: “Take her out from among the ranks, and if anyone follows her, put him to death with the sword!” For the priest had said: “Do not put her to death in the house of Jehovah.” 15 So they seized her, and when she reached the entrance of the Horse Gate of the king’s house, they immediately put her to death there.16 Then Je·hoiʹa·da made a covenant between himself and all the people and the king, that they would continue as the people of Jehovah. 17 After that all the people came to the house of Baʹal and tore it down, and they smashed his altars and his images, and they killed Matʹtan the priest of Baʹal in front of the altars. 18 Then Je·hoiʹa·da put the oversight of the house of Jehovah in the hands of the priests and the Levites, whom David had assigned in divisions over the house of Jehovah to offer up the burnt sacrifices of Jehovah according to what is written in the Law of Moses, with rejoicing and with song, as directed by David. 19 He also stationed the gatekeepers by the gates of the house of Jehovah, so that no one unclean in any respect could enter. 20 He now took the chiefs of hundreds, the nobles, the rulers of the people, and all the people of the land and escorted the king down from the house of Jehovah. Then they came through the upper gate to the king’s house and seated the king on the throne of the kingdom. 21 So all the people of the land rejoiced and the city was quiet, for they had put Ath·a·liʹah to death with the sword.
24 Je·hoʹash was seven years old when he became king, and he reigned for 40 years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Zibʹi·ah from Beʹer-sheʹba. 2 Je·hoʹash continued doing what was right in Jehovah’s eyes all the days of Je·hoiʹa·da the priest. 3 Je·hoiʹa·da chose two wives for him, and he became father to sons and daughters.4 Afterward it was the heart’s desire of Je·hoʹash to renovate the house of Jehovah. 5 So he gathered the priests and the Levites together and said to them: “Go out to the cities of Judah and collect money from all Israel to repair the house of your God from year to year; and you should act quickly in the matter.” But the Levites did not act quickly. 6 So the king called Je·hoiʹa·da the chief and said to him: “Why have you not required the Levites to bring in from Judah and Jerusalem the sacred tax ordered by Moses the servant of Jehovah, the sacred tax of the congregation of Israel, for the tent of the Testimony? 7 For the sons of Ath·a·liʹah, that wicked woman, had broken into the house of the true God, and they had used all the holy things of the house of Jehovah for the Baʹals.” 8 Then, at the king’s order, a chest was made and placed outside at the gate of the house of Jehovah. 9 After that a proclamation was issued throughout Judah and Jerusalem to bring to Jehovah the sacred tax that Moses the servant of the true God had imposed on Israel in the wilderness. 10 All the princes and all the people rejoiced, and they kept bringing contributions and dropping them into the chest until it was full.11 Whenever the Levites brought the chest in to be turned over to the king and they saw that there was a great deal of money in it, the secretary of the king and the commissioner of the chief priest would come and empty the chest, and then they would take it back to its place. That was what they did from day to day, and they gathered money in abundance. 12 Then the king and Je·hoiʹa·da would give it to those supervising the work of the service of Jehovah’s house, and they would hire the stonecutters and the craftsmen for renovating Jehovah’s house, and also workers in iron and copper to repair Jehovah’s house. 13 And those supervising the work got it started, and the repair work progressed under their supervision, and they restored the house of the true God to its proper condition and reinforced it. 14 And as soon as they finished, they brought the money that was left over to the king and Je·hoiʹa·da, and they used it to make utensils for the house of Jehovah, utensils for the ministry and for making offerings and cups and utensils of gold and of silver. And they would offer up burnt sacrifices at the house of Jehovah regularly all the days of Je·hoiʹa·da.15 When Je·hoiʹa·da was old and satisfied with years, he died; he was 130 years old at his death. 16 So they buried him in the City of David along with the kings, because he had done good in Israel with respect to the true God and His house.17 After Je·hoiʹa·da’s death the princes of Judah came and bowed down to the king, and the king listened to them. 18 They abandoned the house of Jehovah the God of their forefathers and began serving the sacred poles and the idols, so that God’s anger came against Judah and Jerusalem because of their guilt. 19 He kept sending prophets among them to bring them back to Jehovah, and they kept warning them, but they refused to listen.20 God’s spirit came upon Zech·a·riʹah the son of Je·hoiʹa·da the priest, and he stood above the people and said to them: “This is what the true God says, ‘Why are you violating the commandments of Jehovah? You will not be successful! Because you have abandoned Jehovah, he will, in turn, abandon you.’” 21 But they conspired against him and stoned him at the king’s order in the courtyard of Jehovah’s house. 22 Thus King Je·hoʹash did not remember the loyal love that his father Je·hoiʹa·da had shown toward him, and he killed his son, who said as he was dying: “May Jehovah see to it and call you to account.”23 At the beginning of the year the Syrian army came up against Je·hoʹash, and they invaded Judah and Jerusalem. Then they did away with all the princes of the people, and they sent all their spoil to the king of Damascus. 24 For although the invading Syrian army had a small number of men, Jehovah handed over to them a very large army, because they had abandoned Jehovah the God of their forefathers; so they executed judgment on Je·hoʹash. 25 And when they withdrew from him (for they left him severely wounded), his own servants conspired against him because he had shed the blood of the sons of Je·hoiʹa·da the priest. They killed him on his own bed. So he died and they buried him in the City of David, but they did not bury him in the burial places of the kings.26 These were the conspirators against him: Zaʹbad the son of Shimʹe·ath the Amʹmon·it·ess and Je·hozʹa·bad the son of Shimʹrith the Moʹab·i·tess. 27 Regarding his sons and the many pronouncements against him and the renovation of the house of the true God, all these things are recorded in the writings of the Book of the Kings. And his son Am·a·ziʹah became king in his place.
25 Am·a·ziʹah was 25 years old when he became king, and he reigned for 29 years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Je·ho·adʹdan of Jerusalem. 2 He continued to do what was right in Jehovah’s eyes, but not with a complete heart. 3 As soon as he had the kingdom firmly in his control, he killed his servants who had killed his father the king. 4 But he did not put their sons to death, for he acted in harmony with what is written in the Law, in the book of Moses, where Jehovah commanded: “Fathers should not die for their sons, and sons should not die for their fathers; but each one should die for his own sin.”5 And Am·a·ziʹah gathered Judah together and had them stand according to the paternal houses, by the chiefs of thousands and by the chiefs of hundreds for all Judah and Benjamin. He registered them from 20 years old and up, and he found them to be 300,000 trained warriors to serve in the army, able to handle the lance and the large shield. 6 Further, he hired from Israel 100,000 mighty warriors for 100 silver talents. 7 But a man of the true God came to him, saying: “O king, do not let the army of Israel go with you, for Jehovah is not with Israel, not with any of the Eʹphra·im·ites. 8 But go by yourself, act, and be courageous in battle. Otherwise, the true God could cause you to stumble before an enemy, for God has the power to help and to cause stumbling.” 9 At this Am·a·ziʹah said to the man of the true God: “But what about the 100 talents that I have given to the troops of Israel?” The man of the true God replied: “Jehovah has the means to give you much more than that.” 10 So Am·a·ziʹah dismissed the troops that had come to him from Eʹphra·im, sending them to their own place. However, they were very angry with Judah, so they returned to their own place in the heat of anger.11 Then Am·a·ziʹah took courage and led his own troops to the Valley of Salt, and he struck down 10,000 men of Seʹir. 12 And the men of Judah captured 10,000 alive. So they brought them to the top of the crag and threw them down from the top of the crag, and they were all dashed to pieces. 13 But the members of the troop whom Am·a·ziʹah had sent back from accompanying him to the war were making raids on the cities of Judah, from Sa·marʹi·a clear to Beth-hoʹron; they struck down 3,000 of them and took much spoil.14 But after Am·a·ziʹah returned from striking down the Eʹdom·ites, he brought the gods of the men of Seʹir and set them up for himself as gods, and he began to bow down before them and to make sacrificial smoke to them. 15 So Jehovah grew very angry with Am·a·ziʹah, and he sent a prophet who said to him: “Why are you following the people’s gods that did not rescue their own people out of your hand?” 16 As he spoke to him, the king said: “Did we appoint you as an adviser to the king? Stop! Why should they strike you down?” Then the prophet quit, but he added: “I know that God has decided to bring you to ruin, because you have done this and you have not listened to my advice.”17 After consulting with his advisers, King Am·a·ziʹah of Judah sent a message to Je·hoʹash son of Je·hoʹa·haz son of Jeʹhu the king of Israel, saying: “Come! Let us confront each other in battle.” 18 King Je·hoʹash of Israel sent this message to King Am·a·ziʹah of Judah: “The thorny weed in Lebʹa·non sent a message to the cedar in Lebʹa·non, ‘Give your daughter to my son as a wife.’ However, a wild beast of Lebʹa·non passed by and trampled down the thorny weed. 19 You have said, ‘Look! I have struck down Eʹdom.’ So your heart has become arrogant, wanting to be glorified. But now stay in your own house. Why should you provoke disaster and fall, bringing Judah down with you?”20 But Am·a·ziʹah did not listen, for this was from the true God to give them into the hand of the enemy, because they had followed the gods of Eʹdom. 21 So King Je·hoʹash of Israel went up, and he and King Am·a·ziʹah of Judah confronted each other in battle at Beth-sheʹmesh, which belongs to Judah. 22 Judah was defeated by Israel, so each one fled to his home. 23 King Je·hoʹash of Israel captured King Am·a·ziʹah of Judah, son of Je·hoʹash son of Je·hoʹa·haz, at Beth-sheʹmesh. Then he brought him to Jerusalem and made a breach in the wall of Jerusalem from the Gate of Eʹphra·im to the Corner Gate, 400 cubits. 24 He took all the gold and the silver and all the articles that were found in the house of the true God with Oʹbed-eʹdom and in the treasuries of the king’s house, as well as hostages. Then he returned to Sa·marʹi·a.25 Am·a·ziʹah the son of Je·hoʹash the king of Judah lived for 15 years after the death of Je·hoʹash the son of Je·hoʹa·haz the king of Israel. 26 As for the rest of the history of Am·a·ziʹah, from beginning to end, look! is it not written in the Book of the Kings of Judah and of Israel? 27 From the time that Am·a·ziʹah turned away from following Jehovah, they formed a conspiracy against him in Jerusalem, and he fled to Laʹchish, but they sent men after him to Laʹchish and put him to death there. 28 So they carried him back on horses and buried him with his forefathers in the city of Judah.
26 Then all the people of Judah took Uz·ziʹah, who was 16 years old, and made him king in place of his father Am·a·ziʹah. 2 He rebuilt Eʹloth and restored it to Judah after the king was laid to rest with his forefathers. 3 Uz·ziʹah was 16 years old when he became king, and he reigned for 52 years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Je·co·liʹah of Jerusalem. 4 He continued to do what was right in Jehovah’s eyes, just as his father Am·a·ziʹah had done. 5 And he kept searching for God in the days of Zech·a·riʹah, who taught him to fear the true God. During the time he was searching for Jehovah, the true God made him prosper.6 He went out and fought against the Phi·lisʹtines and broke through the wall of Gath, the wall of Jabʹneh, and the wall of Ashʹdod. Then he built cities in the territory of Ashʹdod and among the Phi·lisʹtines. 7 The true God continued to help him against the Phi·lisʹtines, against the Arabians who were dwelling in Gur·baʹal, and against the Me·uʹnim. 8 The Amʹmon·ites began to give tribute to Uz·ziʹah. His fame eventually spread as far as Egypt, for he became extremely powerful. 9 Moreover, Uz·ziʹah built towers in Jerusalem by the Corner Gate, the Valley Gate, and the Buttress, and he fortified them. 10 Further, he built towers in the wilderness and dug many cisterns (for he had a great deal of livestock); he also did so in the She·pheʹlah and on the plain. He had farmers and vinedressers in the mountains and in Carʹmel, for he loved agriculture.11 Moreover, Uz·ziʹah came to have an army equipped for war. They would go out on military campaigns, organized in divisions. They were numbered and registered by Je·iʹel the secretary and Ma·a·seiʹah the officer, under the command of Han·a·niʹah, one of the king’s princes. 12 The entire number of the heads of the paternal houses who were over these mighty warriors was 2,600. 13 The armed forces under their command numbered 307,500 men ready for war, a powerful military force to support the king against the enemy. 14 Uz·ziʹah equipped the entire army with shields, lances, helmets, coats of mail, bows, and slingstones. 15 Further, in Jerusalem he made engines of war designed by engineers; they were set on the towers and on the corners of the walls and could shoot arrows and large stones. So his fame spread far and wide, for he received tremendous help and he became strong.16 However, as soon as he was strong, his heart became haughty to his own ruin, and he acted unfaithfully against Jehovah his God by entering the temple of Jehovah to burn incense on the altar of incense. 17 Immediately Az·a·riʹah the priest and 80 other courageous priests of Jehovah went in after him. 18 They confronted King Uz·ziʹah and said to him: “It is not proper for you, Uz·ziʹah, to burn incense to Jehovah! It is only the priests who should burn incense, for they are the descendants of Aaron, those who have been sanctified. Go out from the sanctuary, for you have acted unfaithfully and you will receive no glory from Jehovah God for this.”19 But Uz·ziʹah, who had a censer in his hand to burn incense, became enraged; and during his rage against the priests, leprosy broke out on his forehead in the presence of the priests in the house of Jehovah next to the altar of incense. 20 When Az·a·riʹah the chief priest and all the priests turned toward him, they saw that he had been stricken with leprosy in his forehead! So they rushed him out of there, and he himself hurried out, because Jehovah had struck him.21 King Uz·ziʹah remained a leper until the day of his death, and he kept staying in a separate house as a leper, for he had been excluded from the house of Jehovah. His son Joʹtham was in charge of the king’s house, judging the people of the land.22 And the rest of the history of Uz·ziʹah, from beginning to end, was recorded by the prophet Isaiah the son of Aʹmoz. 23 Then Uz·ziʹah was laid to rest with his forefathers, and they buried him with his forefathers, but in the burial field that belonged to the kings, for they said: “He is a leper.” And his son Joʹtham became king in his place.
27 Joʹtham was 25 years old when he became king, and he reigned for 16 years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Je·ruʹshah the daughter of Zaʹdok. 2 He kept doing what was right in Jehovah’s eyes, just as his father Uz·ziʹah had done, except that he did not invade the temple of Jehovah. But the people were still acting ruinously. 3 He built the upper gate of Jehovah’s house, and he did much building on the wall of Oʹphel. 4 He also built cities in the mountainous region of Judah, and he built fortified places and towers in the wooded areas. 5 He waged war against the king of the Amʹmon·ites and eventually prevailed against them, so that the Amʹmon·ites gave him in that year 100 silver talents, 10,000 cor measures of wheat, and 10,000 of barley. The Amʹmon·ites also paid this to him in the second and third years. 6 So Joʹtham kept growing strong, for he established his ways before Jehovah his God.7 As for the rest of the history of Joʹtham, all his wars and his ways, it is written in the Book of the Kings of Israel and of Judah. 8 He was 25 years old when he became king, and he reigned for 16 years in Jerusalem. 9 Then Joʹtham was laid to rest with his forefathers, and they buried him in the City of David. And his son Aʹhaz became king in his place.
28 Aʹhaz was 20 years old when he became king, and he reigned for 16 years in Jerusalem. He did not do what was right in Jehovah’s eyes as David his forefather had done. 2 Instead, he walked in the ways of the kings of Israel, and he even made metal statues of the Baʹals. 3 Moreover, he made sacrificial smoke in the Valley of the Son of Hinʹnom and burned up his sons in the fire, following the detestable practices of the nations that Jehovah had driven out from before the Israelites. 4 He also kept sacrificing and making sacrificial smoke on the high places, on the hills, and under every luxuriant tree.5 So Jehovah his God gave him into the hand of the king of Syria, so that they defeated him and carried off a great number of captives and brought them to Damascus. He was also given into the hand of the king of Israel, who inflicted on him a great slaughter. 6 For Peʹkah the son of Rem·a·liʹah killed in Judah 120,000 in one day, all brave men, because they had abandoned Jehovah the God of their forefathers. 7 And Zichʹri, an Eʹphra·im·ite warrior, killed the king’s son Ma·a·seiʹah and Az·riʹkam, who was in charge of the palace, and El·kaʹnah, who was second to the king. 8 Moreover, the Israelites took 200,000 of their brothers captive—women, sons, and daughters; they also seized a great deal of spoil, and they took the spoil to Sa·marʹi·a.9 But a prophet of Jehovah named Oʹded was there. He went out before the army that was coming to Sa·marʹi·a and said to them: “Look! It was because Jehovah the God of your forefathers was angry with Judah that he gave them into your hand, and you slaughtered them with a fury that has reached clear to the heavens. 10 And now you intend to make the people of Judah and Jerusalem your male and female servants. Nevertheless, are you not also guilty before Jehovah your God? 11 Now listen to me and return the captives whom you took from your brothers, for Jehovah’s burning anger is against you.”12 At that some of the chiefs of the Eʹphra·im·ites, Az·a·riʹah the son of Je·ho·haʹnan, Ber·e·chiʹah the son of Me·shilʹle·moth, Je·hiz·kiʹah the son of Shalʹlum, and A·maʹsa the son of Hadʹlai, confronted those coming in from the military campaign, 13 and they said to them: “Do not bring the captives in here, for it will make us guilty before Jehovah. What you intend to do will add to our sins and to our guilt, for our guilt is already great and there is burning anger against Israel.” 14 So the armed soldiers handed over the captives and the plunder to the princes and the entire congregation. 15 Then the men who had been designated by name rose up and took hold of the captives, and they provided clothes from the spoil for all those among them who were naked. So they clothed them and gave them sandals, food and drink, and oil for their skin. Furthermore, they transported the feeble on donkeys and brought them to their brothers in Jerʹi·cho, the city of palm trees. After that they returned to Sa·marʹi·a.16 At that time King Aʹhaz asked the kings of As·syrʹi·a for help. 17 And once again the Eʹdom·ites invaded and attacked Judah and carried off captives. 18 The Phi·lisʹtines also made a raid on the cities of the She·pheʹlah and the Negʹeb of Judah and captured Beth-sheʹmesh, Aiʹja·lon, Ge·deʹroth, Soʹco and its dependent towns, Timʹnah and its dependent towns, and Gimʹzo and its dependent towns; and they settled there. 19 Jehovah humbled Judah because of King Aʹhaz of Israel, for he had let Judah go unrestrained, resulting in great unfaithfulness toward Jehovah.20 King Tilʹgath-pil·neʹser of As·syrʹi·a eventually came against him and caused him distress rather than strengthening him. 21 For Aʹhaz had stripped the house of Jehovah and the house of the king and the houses of the princes and made a gift to the king of As·syrʹi·a; but it was of no help to him. 22 And during his time of distress, King Aʹhaz acted even more unfaithfully toward Jehovah. 23 He began to sacrifice to the gods of Damascus that had defeated him, and he went on to say: “Because the gods of the kings of Syria are helping them, I will sacrifice to them so that they may help me.” But they caused him and all Israel to stumble. 24 Furthermore, Aʹhaz collected the utensils of the house of the true God; he then cut to pieces the utensils of the house of the true God, closed the doors of the house of Jehovah, and made altars for himself in every corner of Jerusalem. 25 And in all the cities of Judah, he made high places for making sacrificial smoke to other gods, and he offended Jehovah the God of his forefathers.26 As for the rest of his history, all his dealings from beginning to end, there it is written in the Book of the Kings of Judah and of Israel. 27 Then Aʹhaz was laid to rest with his forefathers, and they buried him in the city, in Jerusalem, for they did not bring him into the burial places of the kings of Israel. And his son Hez·e·kiʹah became king in his place.
29 Hez·e·kiʹah became king at the age of 25, and he reigned for 29 years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was A·biʹjah the daughter of Zech·a·riʹah. 2 He kept doing what was right in Jehovah’s eyes, just as David his forefather had done. 3 In the first year of his reign, in the first month, he opened the doors of the house of Jehovah and repaired them. 4 Then he brought the priests and the Levites and assembled them in the square to the east. 5 He said to them: “Listen to me, you Levites. Now sanctify yourselves and sanctify the house of Jehovah the God of your forefathers, and remove what is impure from the holy place. 6 For our fathers have been unfaithful and have done what was bad in the eyes of Jehovah our God. They abandoned him and turned their faces away from the tabernacle of Jehovah and turned their back on him. 7 They also closed the doors of the porch and extinguished the lamps. They stopped burning incense and offering up burnt sacrifices in the holy place to the God of Israel. 8 Therefore, Jehovah’s indignation came against Judah and Jerusalem, so that he made them an object of horror and astonishment and a cause for whistling, as you can see with your own eyes. 9 Here our forefathers fell by the sword, and our sons, our daughters, and our wives went into captivity for this. 10 Now it is my heart’s desire to make a covenant with Jehovah the God of Israel, so that his burning anger may turn away from us. 11 My sons, now is not the time to be negligent, for Jehovah has chosen you to stand before him, to serve as his ministers, and to make his sacrifices smoke.”12 At that the Levites rose up: Maʹhath the son of A·maʹsai and Joel the son of Az·a·riʹah of the Koʹhath·ites; from the Me·rarʹites, Kish the son of Abʹdi and Az·a·riʹah the son of Je·halʹle·lel; from the Gerʹshon·ites, Joʹah the son of Zimʹmah and Eʹden the son of Joʹah; 13 from the sons of E·li·zaʹphan, Shimʹri and Je·uʹel; from the sons of Aʹsaph, Zech·a·riʹah and Mat·ta·niʹah; 14 from the sons of Heʹman, Je·hiʹel and Shimʹe·i; from the sons of Je·duʹthun, She·maiʹah and Uzʹzi·el. 15 Then they gathered their brothers together and sanctified themselves and came, as the king had commanded by the words of Jehovah, to cleanse the house of Jehovah. 16 The priests then went inside the house of Jehovah to do the cleansing and brought out all the uncleanness that they found in the temple of Jehovah and took it to the courtyard of the house of Jehovah. In turn the Levites took it and carried it outside to the Kidʹron Valley. 17 Thus they began the sanctification on the first day of the first month, and on the eighth day of the month they reached the porch of Jehovah. They sanctified the house of Jehovah for eight days, and on the 16th day of the first month they finished.18 After that they went in to King Hez·e·kiʹah and said: “We have cleansed the whole house of Jehovah, the altar of burnt offering and all its utensils, and the table of the layer bread and all its utensils. 19 And all the utensils that King Aʹhaz cast aside during his reign when he acted unfaithfully we have made ready and sanctified, and they are before the altar of Jehovah.”20 And King Hez·e·kiʹah got up early and gathered the princes of the city together, and they went up to the house of Jehovah. 21 They brought seven bulls, seven rams, seven male lambs, and seven male goats as a sin offering for the kingdom, for the sanctuary, and for Judah. So he told the priests, the descendants of Aaron, to offer them up on the altar of Jehovah. 22 Then they slaughtered the cattle, and the priests took the blood and sprinkled it on the altar; next they slaughtered the rams and sprinkled the blood on the altar, and they slaughtered the male lambs and sprinkled the blood on the altar. 23 Then they brought the male goats of the sin offering before the king and the congregation and laid their hands on them. 24 The priests slaughtered them and made a sin offering with their blood on the altar, to make atonement for all Israel, because the king said that the burnt offering and the sin offering should be for all Israel.25 Meanwhile, he had the Levites stationed at the house of Jehovah with cymbals, stringed instruments, and harps, by the commandment of David and of Gad the king’s visionary and of Nathan the prophet, for the commandment was from Jehovah through his prophets. 26 So the Levites were standing with the instruments of David, and the priests with the trumpets.27 Then Hez·e·kiʹah ordered that the burnt sacrifice be offered on the altar. When the burnt offering started, the song of Jehovah started and also the trumpets, following the direction of the instruments of King David of Israel. 28 And the whole congregation bowed down while the song was sung and the trumpets were sounding—all this continued until the burnt offering was finished. 29 And as soon as they finished making the offering, the king and all those with him bowed low and prostrated themselves. 30 King Hez·e·kiʹah and the princes now told the Levites to praise Jehovah with the words of David and of Aʹsaph the visionary. So they offered praise with great rejoicing, and they bowed down and prostrated themselves.31 Then Hez·e·kiʹah said: “Now that you have been set apart for Jehovah, come and bring sacrifices and thanksgiving offerings to the house of Jehovah.” So the congregation began to bring sacrifices and thanksgiving offerings, and everyone with a willing heart brought burnt offerings. 32 The number of burnt offerings that the congregation brought was 70 cattle, 100 rams, 200 male lambs—all of these as a burnt offering to Jehovah— 33 and the holy offerings were 600 cattle and 3,000 of the flock. 34 But there were not enough priests to skin all the burnt offerings, so their brothers the Levites helped them out until the work was finished and until the priests could sanctify themselves, for the Levites were more conscientious about sanctifying themselves than the priests were. 35 Also, there were many burnt offerings, as well as the fat pieces of the communion sacrifices and the drink offerings for the burnt offerings. Thus the service of the house of Jehovah was restored. 36 So Hez·e·kiʹah and all the people rejoiced over what the true God had established for the people, for this had all happened so suddenly.
3 Then Solʹo·mon started to build the house of Jehovah in Jerusalem on Mount Mo·riʹah, where Jehovah had appeared to his father David, in the place that David had prepared on the threshing floor of Orʹnan the Jebʹu·site. 2 He started to build on the second day of the second month, in the fourth year of his reign. 3 And the foundation that Solʹo·mon laid for building the house of the true God was 60 cubits long and 20 cubits wide, according to the former measurement. 4 The porch in front was 20 cubits long, corresponding to the width of the house, and its height was 120; and he overlaid it inside with pure gold. 5 He paneled the great house with juniper wood, after which he covered it with fine gold, and then he decorated it with palm-tree figures and chains. 6 Further, he overlaid the house with beautiful precious stones; and the gold he used was gold from Par·vaʹim. 7 He covered the house, the rafters, the thresholds, its walls, and its doors with gold; and he engraved cherubs on the walls.8 He now made the Most Holy compartment; its length matched the width of the house, 20 cubits, and its width was 20 cubits. He covered it with 600 talents of fine gold. 9 The weight of the gold for the nails was 50 shekels; and he covered the roof chambers with gold.10 Then he made in the Most Holy compartment two cherub sculptures, and he overlaid them with gold. 11 The overall length of the wings of the cherubs was 20 cubits; one wing of the first cherub was five cubits long and touched the wall of the house, and its other wing was five cubits long and touched one of the other cherub’s wings. 12 And one wing of the other cherub was five cubits long and touched the other wall of the house, and its other wing was five cubits long and touched one of the first cherub’s wings. 13 The wings of these cherubs were spread out 20 cubits; and they stood on their feet, and they faced inward.14 He also made the curtain of blue thread, purple wool, crimson, and fine fabric, and incorporated cherub designs into it.15 Then he made two pillars at the front of the house, 35 cubits in length, and the capital on top of each pillar was five cubits. 16 And he made chains, like necklaces, and put them on the tops of the pillars, and he made 100 pomegranates and put them on the chains. 17 He set up the pillars in front of the temple, one to the right and one to the left; he named the one on the right Jaʹchin and the one on the left Boʹaz.
30 Hez·e·kiʹah sent word to all Israel and Judah, and even wrote letters to Eʹphra·im and Ma·nasʹseh, to come to the house of Jehovah in Jerusalem to observe the Passover to Jehovah the God of Israel. 2 However, the king, his princes, and the whole congregation in Jerusalem decided to observe the Passover in the second month, 3 for they had not been able to observe it at the regular time, because not enough priests had sanctified themselves nor had the people gathered in Jerusalem. 4 This arrangement seemed right in the eyes of the king and the entire congregation. 5 So they decided to make an announcement throughout Israel, from Beʹer-sheʹba to Dan, that the people should come and observe the Passover to Jehovah the God of Israel at Jerusalem, for as a group they had not observed it according to what is written.6 Then the couriers went throughout all Israel and Judah with the letters from the king and his princes, as the king had commanded, saying: “People of Israel, return to Jehovah the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, so that he may return to the remnant who escaped out of the hand of the kings of As·syrʹi·a. 7 Do not be like your forefathers and your brothers who acted unfaithfully toward Jehovah the God of their forefathers, so that he made them an object of horror, just as you are seeing. 8 Now do not be obstinate like your forefathers. Submit to Jehovah and come to his sanctuary that he has sanctified forever and serve Jehovah your God, so that his burning anger may turn away from you. 9 For when you return to Jehovah, your brothers and your sons will be shown mercy by their captors and will be allowed to return to this land, for Jehovah your God is compassionate and merciful, and he will not turn his face away from you if you return to him.”10 So the couriers went from city to city throughout the land of Eʹphra·im and Ma·nasʹseh, even to Zebʹu·lun, but the people were making fun of them and mocking them. 11 However, some individuals from Ashʹer, Ma·nasʹseh, and Zebʹu·lun humbled themselves and came to Jerusalem. 12 The hand of the true God was also in Judah to unite them to carry out what the king and the princes had commanded by the word of Jehovah.13 A multitude of people gathered together at Jerusalem to observe the Festival of Unleavened Bread in the second month; it was a very large congregation. 14 They rose up and removed the altars that were in Jerusalem, and they removed all the incense altars and threw them into the Kidʹron Valley. 15 Then they slaughtered the Passover sacrifice on the 14th day of the second month. The priests and the Levites felt ashamed, so they sanctified themselves and brought burnt offerings to the house of Jehovah. 16 They took their customary places, according to the Law of Moses the man of the true God; then the priests sprinkled the blood received from the hand of the Levites. 17 There were many in the congregation who had not sanctified themselves, and the Levites were in charge of slaughtering the Passover sacrifices for all who were not clean, to sanctify them to Jehovah. 18 For a great number of the people, especially those from Eʹphra·im, Ma·nasʹseh, Isʹsa·char, and Zebʹu·lun, had not cleansed themselves, but they still ate the Passover, contrary to what is written. But Hez·e·kiʹah prayed for them, saying: “May Jehovah, who is good, make allowance for 19 everyone who has prepared his heart to search for the true God, Jehovah, the God of his forefathers, although he has not been purified according to the standard of holiness.” 20 And Jehovah listened to Hez·e·kiʹah and pardoned the people.21 So the Israelites who were in Jerusalem observed the Festival of Unleavened Bread for seven days with great rejoicing, and the Levites and the priests were praising Jehovah day by day, loudly playing their instruments to Jehovah. 22 Moreover, Hez·e·kiʹah spoke to and encouraged all the Levites who served Jehovah with discretion. And they ate throughout the festival for seven days, sacrificing communion sacrifices and giving thanks to Jehovah the God of their forefathers.23 Then all the congregation decided to observe it for seven more days, so they observed it for seven more days with rejoicing. 24 And King Hez·e·kiʹah of Judah contributed for the congregation 1,000 bulls and 7,000 sheep, and the princes contributed for the congregation 1,000 bulls and 10,000 sheep; and priests were sanctifying themselves in great number. 25 And all the congregation of Judah, the priests, the Levites, all the congregation that came from Israel, and the foreign residents who came from the land of Israel and those living in Judah continued rejoicing. 26 And there was great rejoicing in Jerusalem, for from the days of Solʹo·mon the son of David the king of Israel, nothing like this had happened in Jerusalem. 27 Finally the Levite priests stood up and blessed the people; and God heard their voice, and their prayer reached his holy dwelling, the heavens.
31 As soon as they had finished all of this, all the Israelites who were present went out to the cities of Judah, and they smashed the sacred pillars, cut down the sacred poles, and tore down the high places and the altars throughout Judah and Benjamin, as well as in Eʹphra·im and Ma·nasʹseh, until they had destroyed them completely, after which all the Israelites returned to their cities, each one to his own possession.2 Then Hez·e·kiʹah appointed the priests in their divisions and the Levites in their divisions, each of the priests and Levites for their service, for the burnt offerings and the communion sacrifices, to minister and to give thanks and praise in the gates of the courtyards of Jehovah. 3 A portion of the king’s own goods was given for the burnt offerings, including the morning and evening offerings, as well as the burnt offerings for the Sabbaths, the new moons, and the festivals, according to what is written in the Law of Jehovah.4 Furthermore, he commanded the people living in Jerusalem to give the portion due the priests and the Levites, so that they might adhere strictly to the law of Jehovah. 5 As soon as the order was issued, the Israelites gave in great quantities the firstfruits of the grain, new wine, oil, and honey, and of all the produce of the field; they brought in abundantly the tenth of everything. 6 And the people of Israel and of Judah living in the cities of Judah also brought in the tenth of cattle and sheep and the tenth of the holy things that were sanctified to Jehovah their God. They brought it in and put it in many heaps. 7 In the third month they began laying their contributions in heaps; and in the seventh month they finished. 8 When Hez·e·kiʹah and the princes came and saw the heaps, they praised Jehovah and blessed his people Israel.9 Hez·e·kiʹah asked the priests and the Levites about the heaps, 10 and Az·a·riʹah the chief priest of the house of Zaʹdok said to him: “From the time they started bringing the contributions into the house of Jehovah, the people have been eating to satisfaction and there is still an abundant surplus, for Jehovah has blessed his people, and this great plenty is left over.”11 At this Hez·e·kiʹah told them to prepare storerooms in the house of Jehovah, so they prepared them. 12 They kept faithfully bringing in the contributions, the tenth parts, and the holy things; Con·a·niʹah the Levite was put in charge of all of this as supervisor, and his brother Shimʹe·i was second. 13 Je·hiʹel, Az·a·ziʹah, Naʹhath, Asʹa·hel, Jerʹi·moth, Joʹza·bad, Eʹli·el, Is·ma·chiʹah, Maʹhath, and Be·naiʹah were commissioners assisting Con·a·niʹah and his brother Shimʹe·i, by the order of King Hez·e·kiʹah, and Az·a·riʹah was supervisor of the house of the true God. 14 And Koʹre the son of Imʹnah, the Levite gatekeeper on the east side, was in charge of the voluntary offerings of the true God, and he distributed the contribution made to Jehovah and the most holy things. 15 And under his direction were Eʹden, Mi·niʹa·min, Jeshʹu·a, She·maiʹah, Am·a·riʹah, and Shec·a·niʹah, in the cities of the priests, in their office of trust, to distribute equally to their brothers in the divisions, to great and small alike. 16 This was in addition to the distribution made to the males from three years old and up who were listed in the genealogical enrollment, who came daily to serve in the house of Jehovah and to carry out the duties of their divisions.17 The genealogical enrollment of the priests was by their paternal house, as was that of the Levites who were 20 years old and up, by the duties of their divisions. 18 The genealogical enrollment included all their children, their wives, their sons, and their daughters, their entire congregation—for they kept themselves sanctified for what was holy because of their office of trust— 19 as well as the descendants of Aaron, the priests who were living in the fields of the pastures surrounding their cities. In all the cities, men had been designated by name to give portions to every male among the priests and to everyone included in the genealogical enrollment of the Levites.20 Hez·e·kiʹah did this throughout Judah, and he continued to do what was good and right and faithful before Jehovah his God. 21 And every work that he undertook to search for his God, whether in connection with the service of the house of the true God or in the Law and the commandment, he did wholeheartedly, and he was successful.
32 After these things and these acts of faithfulness, King Sen·nachʹer·ib of As·syrʹi·a came and invaded Judah. He besieged the fortified cities, intent on breaking through and capturing them.2 When Hez·e·kiʹah saw that Sen·nachʹer·ib had come and intended to wage war against Jerusalem, 3 he decided, after consulting with his princes and his warriors, to stop up the waters of the springs outside the city, and they gave him their support. 4 Many people were gathered together, and they stopped up all the springs and the stream that flowed through the land, saying: “Why should the kings of As·syrʹi·a come and find plenty of water?”5 Furthermore, with determination he rebuilt the entire broken-down wall and raised towers on it, and outside he made another wall. He also repaired the Mound of the City of David, and he made a large number of weapons and shields. 6 He then appointed military chiefs over the people and assembled them at the public square of the city gate and encouraged them, saying: 7 “Be courageous and strong. Do not be afraid or be terrified because of the king of As·syrʹi·a and all the multitude with him, for there are more with us than there are with him. 8 With him is an arm of flesh, but with us is Jehovah our God to help us and to fight our battles.” And the people were strengthened by the words of King Hez·e·kiʹah of Judah.9 After this, while King Sen·nachʹer·ib of As·syrʹi·a was at Laʹchish with all his imperial might, he sent his servants to Jerusalem, to King Hez·e·kiʹah of Judah and to all the Ju·deʹans in Jerusalem, saying:10 “This is what King Sen·nachʹer·ib of As·syrʹi·a says, ‘In what are you trusting that you remain in Jerusalem while it is besieged? 11 Is not Hez·e·kiʹah misleading you and handing you over to die by famine and thirst, saying: “Jehovah our God will rescue us from the hand of the king of As·syrʹi·a”? 12 Is this not the same Hez·e·kiʹah who removed your God’s high places and His altars and then said to Judah and Jerusalem: “You should bow down before one altar and on it you should make your sacrifices smoke”? 13 Do you not know what I and my forefathers did to all the peoples of the lands? Were the gods of the nations of the lands able to rescue their land from my hand? 14 Who among all the gods of these nations that my forefathers devoted to destruction was able to rescue his people from my hand, so that your God should be able to rescue you from my hand? 15 Now do not let Hez·e·kiʹah deceive you or mislead you like this! Do not put faith in him, for no god of any nation or kingdom was able to rescue his people from my hand and from the hand of my forefathers. How much less, then, will your own God rescue you from my hand!’”16 His servants said even more against Jehovah the true God and against Hez·e·kiʹah his servant. 17 He also wrote letters to insult Jehovah the God of Israel and to speak against him, saying: “Like the gods of the nations of the lands who could not rescue their people from my hand, so the God of Hez·e·kiʹah will not rescue his people from my hand.” 18 They kept calling loudly in the language of the Jews to the people of Jerusalem who were on the wall, to make them afraid and to terrify them, in order to capture the city. 19 They spoke against the God of Jerusalem the same way as against the gods of the peoples of the earth, which are the work of man’s hands. 20 But King Hez·e·kiʹah and the prophet Isaiah the son of Aʹmoz kept praying about this and crying out to the heavens for help.21 Then Jehovah sent an angel and wiped out every mighty warrior, leader, and chief in the camp of the king of As·syrʹi·a, so that he went back to his own land in disgrace. He later entered the house of his god, and there some of his own sons struck him down with the sword. 22 So Jehovah saved Hez·e·kiʹah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem from the hand of King Sen·nachʹer·ib of As·syrʹi·a and from the hand of all others and gave them rest on every side. 23 And many brought gifts to Jehovah at Jerusalem and choice things to King Hez·e·kiʹah of Judah, and he was greatly respected by all the nations after that.24 In those days Hez·e·kiʹah became sick and was at the point of death, and he prayed to Jehovah, who answered him and gave him a sign. 25 But Hez·e·kiʹah did not respond appreciatively to the good done to him, for his heart became haughty, bringing indignation against him and against Judah and Jerusalem. 26 However, Hez·e·kiʹah humbled himself for the haughtiness of his heart, he and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and Jehovah’s indignation did not come upon them in the days of Hez·e·kiʹah.27 And Hez·e·kiʹah came to have vast riches and glory; and he made storehouses for himself for silver, gold, precious stones, balsam oil, shields, and for all the desirable articles. 28 He also made storage places for the produce of grain and new wine and oil, as well as stalls for all the different kinds of livestock and stalls for the flocks. 29 He also acquired cities for himself, and an abundance of livestock, flocks, and herds, for God gave him very many possessions. 30 It was Hez·e·kiʹah who stopped up the upper source of the waters of Giʹhon and directed them straight down to the west to the City of David, and Hez·e·kiʹah was successful in every work of his. 31 However, when the spokesmen of the princes of Babylon were sent to ask him about the sign that had occurred in the land, the true God left him alone to put him to the test, to get to know all that was in his heart.32 As for the rest of the history of Hez·e·kiʹah and his acts of loyal love, they are written in the vision of Isaiah the prophet, the son of Aʹmoz, in the Book of the Kings of Judah and of Israel. 33 Then Hez·e·kiʹah was laid to rest with his forefathers, and they buried him in the ascent to the burial places of the sons of David; and all Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem honored him at his death. And his son Ma·nasʹseh became king in his place.
33 Ma·nasʹseh was 12 years old when he became king, and he reigned for 55 years in Jerusalem.2 He did what was bad in Jehovah’s eyes, following the detestable practices of the nations that Jehovah had driven out from before the people of Israel. 3 He rebuilt the high places that his father Hez·e·kiʹah had torn down, he set up altars to the Baʹals and made sacred poles, and he bowed down to all the army of the heavens and served them. 4 He also built altars in the house of Jehovah, about which Jehovah had said: “In Jerusalem my name will be forever.” 5 And he built altars to all the army of the heavens in two courtyards of the house of Jehovah. 6 And he made his own sons pass through the fire in the Valley of the Son of Hinʹnom; he practiced magic, used divination, practiced sorcery, and appointed spirit mediums and fortune-tellers. He did on a grand scale what was bad in Jehovah’s eyes, to offend him.7 He put the carved image that he made into the house of the true God about which God had said to David and to his son Solʹo·mon: “In this house and in Jerusalem, which I have chosen out of all the tribes of Israel, I will permanently put my name. 8 And I will never again remove the feet of Israel from the land that I assigned to their forefathers, provided they carefully observe all that I have commanded them, the entire Law, the regulations and the judicial decisions given through Moses.” 9 Ma·nasʹseh kept leading Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem astray, causing them to do worse than the nations that Jehovah had annihilated from before the Israelites.10 Jehovah kept speaking to Ma·nasʹseh and his people, but they paid no attention. 11 So Jehovah brought against them the army chiefs of the king of As·syrʹi·a, and they captured Ma·nasʹseh with hooks and bound him with two copper fetters and took him to Babylon. 12 In his distress, he begged Jehovah his God for favor and kept humbling himself greatly before the God of his forefathers. 13 He kept praying to Him, and He was moved by his entreaty and heard his request for favor, and He restored him to Jerusalem to his kingship. Then Ma·nasʹseh came to know that Jehovah is the true God.14 After this he built an outer wall for the City of David west of Giʹhon in the valley and as far as the Fish Gate, and he continued it around to Oʹphel, and he made it very high. Further, he appointed army chiefs in all the fortified cities in Judah. 15 He then removed the foreign gods and the idol image from the house of Jehovah and all the altars that he had built in the mountain of the house of Jehovah and in Jerusalem, and he had them thrown outside the city. 16 He also prepared the altar of Jehovah and began to offer up communion sacrifices and thanksgiving sacrifices on it, and he told Judah to serve Jehovah the God of Israel. 17 Nevertheless, the people were still sacrificing on the high places, although only to Jehovah their God.18 As for the rest of the history of Ma·nasʹseh, his prayer to his God, and the words of the visionaries who spoke to him in the name of Jehovah the God of Israel, they are recorded in the history of the kings of Israel. 19 Also his prayer and how his entreaty was granted him, all his sins and his unfaithfulness, the locations where he built high places and set up the sacred poles and the graven images before he humbled himself, they are written among the words of his visionaries. 20 Then Ma·nasʹseh was laid to rest with his forefathers, and they buried him at his house; and his son Aʹmon became king in his place.21 Aʹmon was 22 years old when he became king, and he reigned for two years in Jerusalem. 22 And he continued to do what was bad in Jehovah’s eyes, just as his father Ma·nasʹseh had done; and Aʹmon sacrificed to all the graven images that his father Ma·nasʹseh had made, and he kept serving them. 23 But he did not humble himself before Jehovah as Ma·nasʹseh his father had humbled himself; instead, Aʹmon greatly increased his guilt. 24 Eventually his servants conspired against him and put him to death in his own house. 25 But the people of the land struck down all those who conspired against King Aʹmon, and they made his son Jo·siʹah king in his place.
34 Jo·siʹah was eight years old when he became king, and he reigned for 31 years in Jerusalem. 2 He did what was right in Jehovah’s eyes and walked in the ways of David his forefather, and he did not deviate to the right or to the left.3 In the 8th year of his reign, while he was still a boy, he started to search for the God of David his forefather; and in the 12th year, he started to cleanse Judah and Jerusalem of the high places and the sacred poles, the graven images, and the metal statues. 4 Further, they tore down the altars of the Baʹals in his presence, and he cut down the incense stands that were up above them. He also broke into pieces the sacred poles, the graven images, and the metal statues and reduced them to powder and sprinkled it over the graves of those who used to sacrifice to them. 5 And he burned the bones of priests on their altars. Thus he cleansed Judah and Jerusalem.6 And in the cities of Ma·nasʹseh, Eʹphra·im, Simʹe·on, and clear to Naphʹta·li, in their surrounding ruins, 7 he tore down the altars and he crushed the sacred poles and the graven images, reducing them to powder; and he cut down all the incense stands in all the land of Israel, after which he returned to Jerusalem.8 In the 18th year of his reign, when he had cleansed the land and the temple, he sent Shaʹphan the son of Az·a·liʹah, Ma·a·seiʹah the chief of the city, and Joʹah the son of Joʹa·haz the recorder to repair the house of Jehovah his God. 9 They came to Hil·kiʹah the high priest and gave him the money that had been brought to the house of God, which the Levites serving as doorkeepers had collected from Ma·nasʹseh, Eʹphra·im, and all the rest of Israel, as well as from Judah, Benjamin, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem. 10 Then they gave it to those who were appointed over the work in the house of Jehovah. In turn the workers in the house of Jehovah used it to mend and repair the house. 11 They gave it to the craftsmen and the builders to buy hewn stones and timbers for braces and to build with beams the houses that the kings of Judah had allowed to fall into ruin.12 And the men did the work faithfully. Over them were appointed the Levites Jaʹhath and O·ba·diʹah of the Me·rarʹites, and Zech·a·riʹah and Me·shulʹlam of the Koʹhath·ites, to serve as overseers. And the Levites, all of whom were skilled musicians, 13 were in charge of the common laborers and were overseers of all those who were doing the work in every kind of service; and some of the Levites were secretaries, officers, and gatekeepers.14 While they were taking out the money that had been brought to the house of Jehovah, Hil·kiʹah the priest found the book of Jehovah’s Law given through Moses. 15 So Hil·kiʹah said to Shaʹphan the secretary: “I have found the book of the Law in the house of Jehovah.” With that Hil·kiʹah gave the book to Shaʹphan. 16 Then Shaʹphan brought the book to the king and told him: “Your servants are doing everything that was assigned to them. 17 They have poured out the money that was found in the house of Jehovah, and they have handed it over to the appointed men and to those doing the work.” 18 Shaʹphan the secretary also told the king: “There is a book that Hil·kiʹah the priest has given me.” Then Shaʹphan began to read from it before the king.19 As soon as the king heard the words of the Law, he ripped his garments apart. 20 Then the king gave this order to Hil·kiʹah, A·hiʹkam the son of Shaʹphan, Abʹdon the son of Miʹcah, Shaʹphan the secretary, and A·saiʹah the king’s servant: 21 “Go, inquire of Jehovah in my behalf and in behalf of those who remain in Israel and in Judah concerning the words of the book that has been found; for Jehovah’s rage that will be poured out against us is great because our forefathers did not carry out the word of Jehovah by observing all that is written in this book.”22 So Hil·kiʹah, along with those sent by the king, went to Hulʹdah the prophetess. She was the wife of Shalʹlum son of Tikʹvah son of Harʹhas, the caretaker of the wardrobe, and she was dwelling in the Second Quarter of Jerusalem; and they spoke to her there. 23 She said to them: “This is what Jehovah the God of Israel says, ‘Tell the man who sent you to me: 24 “This is what Jehovah says, ‘I will bring calamity on this place and its inhabitants, all the curses that are written in the book that they read before the king of Judah. 25 Because they have abandoned me and are making sacrifices smoke to other gods in order to offend me with all the works of their hands, my rage will pour out on this place and it will not be extinguished.’” 26 But to the king of Judah who sent you to inquire of Jehovah, this is what you should say to him, “This is what Jehovah the God of Israel says: ‘Regarding the words that you have heard, 27 because your heart was responsive and you humbled yourself before God on hearing his words concerning this place and its inhabitants and you humbled yourself before me and ripped your garments apart and wept before me, I also have heard you, declares Jehovah. 28 That is why I will gather you to your ancestors, and you will be laid in your grave in peace, and your eyes will not see all the calamity that I will bring on this place and its inhabitants.’”’”Then they brought the reply to the king. 29 So the king sent word and summoned all the elders of Judah and Jerusalem. 30 After that the king went up to the house of Jehovah with all the men of Judah, the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the priests, the Levites—all the people, the great as well as the small. He read in their hearing all the words of the book of the covenant that had been found in the house of Jehovah. 31 The king stood in his place and made a covenant before Jehovah that he would follow Jehovah and keep his commandments, his reminders, and his regulations with all his heart and with all his soul by carrying out the words of the covenant that were written in this book. 32 Furthermore, he had all those who were in Jerusalem and Benjamin to agree to it. And the inhabitants of Jerusalem acted according to the covenant of God, the God of their forefathers. 33 Jo·siʹah then removed all the detestable things out of all the lands that belonged to the Israelites, and he made everyone in Israel serve Jehovah their God. Throughout his lifetime they did not deviate from following Jehovah the God of their forefathers.
35 Jo·siʹah held a Passover to Jehovah in Jerusalem, and they slaughtered the Passover sacrifice on the 14th day of the first month. 2 He assigned the priests to their duties and encouraged them to carry out their service of the house of Jehovah. 3 Then he said to the Levites, the instructors of all Israel, those who were holy to Jehovah: “Put the holy Ark in the house that Solʹo·mon the son of David the king of Israel built; you are no longer to carry it on your shoulders. Now serve Jehovah your God and his people Israel. 4 And prepare yourselves by your paternal houses according to your divisions, following what was written by King David of Israel and by his son Solʹo·mon. 5 Stand in the holy place grouped by the paternal houses of your brothers, the rest of the people, with a corresponding group of the paternal house of the Levites. 6 Slaughter the Passover sacrifice and sanctify yourselves and make preparation for your brothers to carry out the word of Jehovah through Moses.”7 Jo·siʹah contributed flocks to the people, male lambs and young male goats, for the Passover sacrifices for all who were present, a total of 30,000, as well as 3,000 cattle. These were from the king’s own property. 8 His princes also made a contribution as a voluntary offering for the people, the priests, and the Levites. Hil·kiʹah, Zech·a·riʹah, and Je·hiʹel, the leaders of the house of the true God, gave to the priests 2,600 Passover sacrifices and 300 cattle. 9 Con·a·niʹah and his brothers She·maiʹah and Ne·thanʹel, along with Hash·a·biʹah, Je·iʹel, and Joʹza·bad, the chiefs of the Levites, contributed to the Levites 5,000 Passover sacrifices and 500 cattle.10 The service was prepared, and the priests stood at their places and the Levites by their divisions, as the king had commanded. 11 They slaughtered the Passover sacrifices, and the priests sprinkled the blood they received from them, while the Levites were skinning the animals. 12 Next they prepared the burnt offerings so as to distribute them to the rest of the people, who were grouped by paternal house, so that they could be presented to Jehovah as it is written in the book of Moses; and they did the same with the cattle. 13 They cooked the Passover offering over the fire according to the custom; and they cooked the holy offerings in pots, cauldrons, and pans, after which they brought it quickly to all the rest of the people. 14 Then they made preparations for themselves and for the priests, because the priests, the descendants of Aaron, were offering up the burnt sacrifices and the fat pieces until nightfall, so the Levites made preparations for themselves and for the priests, the descendants of Aaron.15 And the singers, the sons of Aʹsaph, were at their positions by the commandment of David, Aʹsaph, Heʹman, and Je·duʹthun the visionary of the king; and the gatekeepers were at the different gates. There was no need for them to leave their service, because their brothers the Levites made preparations for them. 16 So all the service of Jehovah was prepared on that day to hold the Passover and to offer up the burnt offerings on the altar of Jehovah, according to the order of King Jo·siʹah.17 The Israelites who were present held the Passover at that time and the Festival of Unleavened Bread for seven days. 18 There had never been held a Passover like it in Israel since the days of Samuel the prophet; nor had any of the other kings of Israel held a Passover like that held by Jo·siʹah, the priests, the Levites, all Judah and Israel who were present, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem. 19 This Passover was held in the 18th year of Jo·siʹah’s reign.20 After all of this, when Jo·siʹah had prepared the temple, King Neʹcho of Egypt came up to fight at Carʹche·mish by the Eu·phraʹtes. Then Jo·siʹah went out against him. 21 So he sent messengers to him, saying: “What does this have to do with you, O king of Judah? I am not coming against you today, but my fight is against another house, and God says that I should hurry. For your own sake, refrain from opposing God, who is with me, or he will bring you to ruin.” 22 However, Jo·siʹah would not turn away from him, but he disguised himself to fight against him and would not listen to the words of Neʹcho, which were from the mouth of God. So he came to fight in the Plain of Me·gidʹdo.23 And the archers shot King Jo·siʹah, and the king said to his servants: “Get me out of here, for I am severely wounded.” 24 So his servants took him out of the chariot and had him ride in his second war chariot and brought him to Jerusalem. Thus he died and was buried in the tomb of his forefathers, and all Judah and Jerusalem mourned Jo·siʹah. 25 And Jeremiah chanted over Jo·siʹah, and all the male and female singers keep singing about Jo·siʹah in their dirges down to this day; and a decision was made that they should be sung in Israel, and they are written among the dirges.26 As for the rest of the history of Jo·siʹah and his deeds of loyal love, in keeping with what is written in the Law of Jehovah, 27 and what he did, from beginning to end, they are written in the Book of the Kings of Israel and of Judah.
36 Then the people of the land took Jo·siʹah’s son Je·hoʹa·haz and made him king in Jerusalem in place of his father. 2 Je·hoʹa·haz was 23 years old when he became king, and he reigned for three months in Jerusalem. 3 However, the king of Egypt deposed him in Jerusalem and fined the land 100 silver talents and a gold talent. 4 Furthermore, the king of Egypt made Je·hoʹa·haz’ brother E·liʹa·kim king over Judah and Jerusalem and changed his name to Je·hoiʹa·kim; but Neʹcho took his brother Je·hoʹa·haz and brought him to Egypt.5 Je·hoiʹa·kim was 25 years old when he became king, and he reigned for 11 years in Jerusalem. He continued to do what was bad in the eyes of Jehovah his God. 6 King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon came up against him in order to bind him with two copper fetters to take him off to Babylon. 7 And Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar took some of the utensils of the house of Jehovah to Babylon and put them in his palace in Babylon. 8 As for the rest of the history of Je·hoiʹa·kim, the detestable things that he did and what was found against him, it is written in the Book of the Kings of Israel and of Judah; and his son Je·hoiʹa·chin became king in his place.9 Je·hoiʹa·chin was 18 years old when he became king, and he reigned for three months and ten days in Jerusalem; and he continued to do what was bad in Jehovah’s eyes. 10 At the start of the year, King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar sent to have him brought to Babylon, along with valuable articles of the house of Jehovah. And he made his father’s brother Zed·e·kiʹah king over Judah and Jerusalem.11 Zed·e·kiʹah was 21 years old when he became king, and he reigned for 11 years in Jerusalem. 12 He continued to do what was bad in the eyes of Jehovah his God. He did not humble himself before the prophet Jeremiah, who spoke at the order of Jehovah. 13 He also rebelled against King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar, who had made him take an oath by God, and he remained stubborn and hardhearted and refused to turn to Jehovah the God of Israel. 14 All the chiefs of the priests as well as the people were exceedingly unfaithful, practicing all the detestable things of the nations, and they defiled the house of Jehovah that he had sanctified in Jerusalem.15 Jehovah the God of their forefathers kept warning them by means of his messengers, warning them again and again, because he felt compassion for his people and for his dwelling place. 16 But they kept ridiculing the messengers of the true God, and they despised his words and mocked his prophets, until the rage of Jehovah came up against his people, until they were beyond healing.17 So he brought against them the king of the Chal·deʹans, who killed their young men with the sword in the house of their sanctuary; he felt no compassion for young man or virgin, old or infirm. God gave everything into his hand. 18 All the utensils of the house of the true God, great and small, as well as the treasures of the house of Jehovah and the treasures of the king and his princes, everything he brought to Babylon. 19 He burned down the house of the true God, tore down the wall of Jerusalem, burned all its fortified towers with fire, and destroyed everything of value. 20 He carried off captive to Babylon those who escaped the sword, and they became servants to him and his sons until the kingdom of Persia began to reign, 21 to fulfill Jehovah’s word spoken by Jeremiah, until the land had paid off its sabbaths. All the days it lay desolate it kept sabbath, to fulfill 70 years.22 In the first year of King Cyrus of Persia, in order that Jehovah’s word spoken by Jeremiah would be fulfilled, Jehovah stirred the spirit of King Cyrus of Persia to make a proclamation throughout his kingdom, which he also put in writing, saying: 23 “This is what King Cyrus of Persia says, ‘Jehovah the God of the heavens has given me all the kingdoms of the earth, and he has commissioned me to build him a house in Jerusalem, which is in Judah. Whoever there is among you of all his people, may Jehovah his God be with him, and let him go up.’”
4 Then he made the copper altar, 20 cubits long, 20 cubits wide, and 10 cubits high.2 He made the Sea of cast metal. It was circular in shape, 10 cubits from brim to brim and 5 cubits high, and it took a measuring line 30 cubits long to encircle it. 3 And there were ornamental gourds under it, completely encircling it, ten to a cubit all around the Sea. The gourds were in two rows and were cast in one piece with it. 4 It stood on 12 bulls, 3 facing north, 3 facing west, 3 facing south, and 3 facing east; and the Sea rested on them, and all their hindquarters were toward the center. 5 And its thickness was a handbreadth; and its brim was made like the brim of a cup, like a lily blossom. The reservoir could hold 3,000 bath measures.6 Further, he made ten basins for washing and put five to the right and five to the left. They would rinse in them the things used for the burnt offering. But the Sea was for the priests for washing.7 He then made ten lampstands of gold, as specified, and put them in the temple, five on the right and five on the left.8 He also made ten tables and placed them in the temple, five on the right and five on the left; and he made 100 golden bowls.9 Then he made the courtyard of the priests and the great court and the doors for the court, and he overlaid their doors with copper. 10 And he placed the Sea on the right side, toward the southeast.11 Hiʹram also made the cans, the shovels, and the bowls.So Hiʹram finished the work that he did for King Solʹo·mon on the house of the true God: 12 the two pillars and the bowl-shaped capitals that were on top of the two pillars; the two networks to cover the two bowl-shaped capitals that were on top of the pillars; 13 the 400 pomegranates for the two networks, two rows of pomegranates for each network, to cover the two bowl-shaped capitals that were on the pillars; 14 the ten carriages and the ten basins on the carriages; 15 the Sea and the 12 bulls beneath it; 16 and the cans, the shovels, the forks, and all their utensils Hiʹram-aʹbiv made of polished copper for King Solʹo·mon for the house of Jehovah. 17 The king cast them in the district of the Jordan in the thick clay between Sucʹcoth and Zerʹe·dah. 18 Solʹo·mon made all these utensils in great quantities; the weight of the copper was not ascertained.19 Solʹo·mon made all the utensils for the house of the true God: the altar of gold; the tables with the showbread on them; 20 the lampstands and their lamps of pure gold, to burn before the innermost room according to the requirements; 21 and the blossoms, the lamps, and the snuffers, of gold, the purest gold; 22 the extinguishers, the bowls, the cups, and the fire holders, of pure gold; and the entrance of the house, its inner doors for the Most Holy, and the doors of the house of the temple, of gold.
5 So Solʹo·mon completed all the work he had to do for the house of Jehovah. Solʹo·mon then brought in the things that David his father had made holy, and he put the silver, the gold, and all the articles into the treasuries of the house of the true God. 2 At that time Solʹo·mon congregated the elders of Israel, all the heads of the tribes, the chieftains of the paternal houses of Israel. They came to Jerusalem to bring up the ark of the covenant of Jehovah from the City of David, that is, Zion. 3 All the men of Israel assembled before the king at the festival that is held in the seventh month.4 So all the elders of Israel came, and the Levites lifted up the Ark. 5 They brought up the Ark, the tent of meeting, and all the holy utensils that were in the tent. The priests and the Levites brought them up. 6 King Solʹo·mon and the entire assembly of Israel who had been summoned to meet with him were before the Ark. So many sheep and cattle were being sacrificed that they could not be counted or numbered. 7 Then the priests brought the ark of the covenant of Jehovah to its place, into the innermost room of the house, the Most Holy, underneath the wings of the cherubs. 8 Thus the wings of the cherubs were spread out over the place of the Ark, so that the cherubs covered over the Ark and its poles from above. 9 The poles were so long that the tips of the poles were visible from the Holy in front of the innermost room, but they were not visible from outside. And they are there to this day. 10 There was nothing in the Ark but the two tablets that Moses placed in it at Hoʹreb, when Jehovah made a covenant with the people of Israel while they were coming out of Egypt.11 When the priests came out from the holy place (for all the priests who were present had sanctified themselves, regardless of their divisions), 12 all the Levite singers who belonged to Aʹsaph, to Heʹman, to Je·duʹthun, and to their sons and their brothers were clothed in fine fabric, holding cymbals, stringed instruments, and harps; they were standing east of the altar, and along with them 120 priests were sounding the trumpets. 13 At the moment when the trumpeters and the singers were praising and thanking Jehovah in unison, and as the sound ascended from the trumpets, the cymbals, and the other musical instruments as they were praising Jehovah, “for he is good; his loyal love endures forever,” then the house, the house of Jehovah, was filled with a cloud. 14 The priests were not able to stand to minister because of the cloud, for the glory of Jehovah filled the house of the true God.
6 At that time Solʹo·mon said: “Jehovah said he would reside in the thick gloom. 2 Now I have built a lofty house for you, an established place for you to dwell in forever.”3 Then the king turned around and began to bless all the congregation of Israel while all the congregation of Israel stood. 4 He said: “May Jehovah the God of Israel be praised, the one who by his own mouth promised my father David and by his own hands has given fulfillment, saying, 5 ‘From the day I brought my people out of the land of Egypt, I have not chosen a city out of all the tribes of Israel in which to build a house for my name to remain there, and I have not chosen a man to become leader over my people Israel. 6 But I have chosen Jerusalem for my name to remain there, and I have chosen David to be over my people Israel.’ 7 And it was the heart’s desire of my father David to build a house for the name of Jehovah the God of Israel. 8 But Jehovah said to my father David, ‘It was your heart’s desire to build a house for my name, and you did well to desire this in your heart. 9 However, you will not build the house, but your own son who is to be born to you is the one who will build the house for my name.’ 10 Jehovah has carried out the promise that he made, for I have succeeded my father David and I sit on the throne of Israel, just as Jehovah promised. I have also built the house for the name of Jehovah the God of Israel, 11 and there I have placed the Ark containing the covenant that Jehovah made with the people of Israel.”12 Then he stood before the altar of Jehovah in front of all the congregation of Israel, and he spread out his hands. 13 (For Solʹo·mon had made a platform of copper and put it in the middle of the court. It was five cubits long, five cubits wide, and three cubits high; and he stood on it.) And he knelt down in front of all the congregation of Israel and spread his hands out to the heavens, 14 and he said: “O Jehovah the God of Israel, there is no God like you in the heavens or on the earth, keeping the covenant and showing loyal love to your servants who are walking before you with all their heart. 15 You have kept the promise that you made to your servant David my father. You made the promise with your own mouth, and this day you have fulfilled it with your own hand. 16 And now, O Jehovah the God of Israel, keep the promise you made to your servant David my father when you said: ‘There will never fail to be a man of your line before me to sit on the throne of Israel, if only your sons will pay attention to their way by walking in my law, just as you have walked before me.’ 17 And now, O Jehovah the God of Israel, let the promise that you made to your servant David prove trustworthy.18 “But will God really dwell with mankind on the earth? Look! The heavens, yes, the heaven of the heavens, cannot contain you; how much less, then, this house that I have built! 19 Now pay attention to the prayer of your servant and to his request for favor, O Jehovah my God, and listen to the cry for help and to the prayer that your servant is praying before you. 20 May your eyes be open toward this house day and night, toward the place where you said that you would put your name, to listen to the prayer that your servant prays toward this place. 21 And listen to your servant’s pleas for help and to the pleas of your people Israel when they pray toward this place, and may you hear from your dwelling place, from the heavens; yes, may you hear and forgive.22 “If a man sins against his fellow man and is made to take an oath and is brought under liability to the oath, and while under the oath he comes before your altar in this house, 23 may you then hear from the heavens and act and judge your servants by paying back the wicked one and bringing what he did on his own head and by pronouncing the righteous one innocent and rewarding him according to his own righteousness.24 “And if your people Israel are defeated by an enemy because they kept sinning against you, and they return and glorify your name and pray and beg for favor before you in this house, 25 may you then hear from the heavens and forgive the sin of your people Israel and bring them back to the land that you gave to them and their forefathers.26 “When the heavens are shut up and there is no rain because they kept sinning against you, and they pray toward this place and glorify your name and turn back from their sin because you humbled them, 27 may you then hear from the heavens and forgive the sin of your servants, of your people Israel, for you will instruct them about the good way in which they should walk; and bring rain on your land that you gave to your people as an inheritance.28 “If a famine occurs in the land, or a pestilence, a scorching blight, mildew, swarming locusts, or voracious locusts or if their enemies besiege them in any of the cities of the land or if any other sort of plague or disease occurs, 29 whatever prayer, whatever request for favor may be made by any man or by all your people Israel (for each one knows his own plague and his own pain) when they spread out their hands toward this house, 30 then may you hear from the heavens, your dwelling place, and may you forgive; and reward each one according to all his ways, for you know his heart (you alone truly know the human heart), 31 so that they may fear you by walking in your ways all the days they live on the land that you gave to our forefathers.32 “Also concerning the foreigner who is not part of your people Israel and who comes from a distant land because of your great name and your mighty hand and your outstretched arm, and he comes and prays toward this house, 33 may you then listen from the heavens, your dwelling place, and do all that the foreigner asks of you, so that all the peoples of the earth may know your name and fear you, as your people Israel do, and may know that your name has been called on this house that I have built.34 “If your people go to war against their enemies in the way that you send them and they pray to you in the direction of this city that you have chosen and toward the house that I have built for your name, 35 then hear from the heavens their prayer and their request for favor and execute judgment for them.36 “If they sin against you (for there is no man who does not sin), and you are furious with them and you abandon them to an enemy, and their captors carry them off captive to a land, far or near, 37 and they come to their senses in the land where they were carried off captive, and they return to you and beg you for favor in the land where they are captives, saying, ‘We have sinned and done wrong; we have acted wickedly,’ 38 and they return to you with all their heart and all their soul in the land of their captivity where they were carried off captive, and they pray in the direction of their land that you gave to their forefathers and the city that you have chosen and the house that I have built for your name, 39 then hear from the heavens, your dwelling place, their prayer and their request for favor, and execute judgment for them and forgive your people who have sinned against you.40 “Now, O my God, please, may your eyes be opened and your ears attentive to the prayer offered in this place. 41 And now go up, O Jehovah God, to your resting-place, you and the Ark of your strength. Let your priests, O Jehovah God, be clothed with salvation, and let your loyal ones rejoice in your goodness. 42 O Jehovah God, do not reject your anointed one. May you remember your loyal love to David your servant.”
7 Now as soon as Solʹo·mon had finished praying, fire came down from the heavens and consumed the burnt offering and the sacrifices, and Jehovah’s glory filled the house. 2 The priests were unable to enter the house of Jehovah because Jehovah’s glory had filled the house of Jehovah. 3 And all the people of Israel were looking on when the fire came down and the glory of Jehovah was upon the house, and they bowed low with their faces to the ground on the pavement and prostrated themselves and thanked Jehovah, “for he is good; his loyal love endures forever.”4 Now the king and all the people offered sacrifices before Jehovah. 5 King Solʹo·mon offered the sacrifice of 22,000 cattle and 120,000 sheep. Thus the king and all the people inaugurated the house of the true God. 6 The priests were standing at their posts of duty, as were the Levites who had the instruments used to accompany the song to Jehovah. (King David had made these instruments for giving thanks to Jehovah—“for his loyal love endures forever”—when David would offer praise with them.) And the priests were loudly sounding the trumpets in front of them, while all the Israelites were standing.7 Then Solʹo·mon sanctified the middle of the courtyard that was before the house of Jehovah, for there he had to offer up the burnt offerings and the fat pieces of the communion sacrifices, because the copper altar that Solʹo·mon had made could not contain the burnt sacrifices, the grain offerings, and the fat pieces. 8 At that time Solʹo·mon held the festival for seven days together with all Israel, a very great congregation from Leʹbo-haʹmath down to the Wadi of Egypt. 9 But on the eighth day they held a solemn assembly, because they had held the inauguration of the altar for seven days and the festival for seven days. 10 Then on the 23rd day of the seventh month, he sent the people away to their homes rejoicing and feeling glad of heart over the goodness that Jehovah had shown to David and Solʹo·mon and Israel his people.11 Thus Solʹo·mon finished the house of Jehovah and the house of the king; and everything that came into Solʹo·mon’s heart to do regarding the house of Jehovah and his own house he accomplished successfully. 12 Jehovah then appeared to Solʹo·mon during the night and said to him: “I have heard your prayer, and I have chosen this place for myself as a house of sacrifice. 13 When I shut up the heavens and there is no rain and when I command the grasshoppers to devour the land and if I send a pestilence among my people, 14 if my people on whom my name has been called humble themselves and pray and seek my face and turn away from their evil ways, then I will hear from the heavens and forgive their sin and heal their land. 15 Now my eyes will be open and my ears attentive to prayer at this place. 16 And now I have chosen and sanctified this house so that my name may be there permanently, and my eyes and my heart will always be there.17 “And you, if you walk before me as your father David walked by doing everything I have commanded you, and you obey my regulations and my judgments, 18 then I will establish the throne of your kingship, just as I made a covenant with your father David, saying, ‘There will never fail to be a man of your line ruling over Israel.’ 19 But if you turn away and forsake my statutes and my commandments that I have put before you and you go and serve other gods and bow down to them, 20 I will uproot Israel from my land that I have given them, and this house that I have sanctified for my name I will cast out of my sight, and I will make it an object of scorn and a cause for ridicule among all the peoples. 21 And this house will become heaps of ruins. Everyone passing by it will stare in amazement and will say, ‘Why did Jehovah do that to this land and this house?’ 22 Then they will say, ‘It was because they abandoned Jehovah the God of their forefathers, who had brought them out of the land of Egypt, and they embraced other gods and bowed down to them and served them. That is why he brought all this calamity on them.’”
8 At the end of 20 years, during which Solʹo·mon built the house of Jehovah and his own house, 2 Solʹo·mon rebuilt the cities that Hiʹram had given Solʹo·mon and settled Israelites there. 3 Furthermore, Solʹo·mon went to Haʹmath-zoʹbah and captured it. 4 Then he built up Tadʹmor in the wilderness and all the storage cities that he had built in Haʹmath. 5 He also built up Upper Beth-hoʹron and Lower Beth-hoʹron, fortified cities with walls, gates, and bars, 6 and Baʹal·ath as well as all of Solʹo·mon’s storage cities, all the chariot cities, the cities for the horsemen, and whatever Solʹo·mon desired to build in Jerusalem, in Lebʹa·non, and in all the land of his dominion.7 As for all the people who were left from the Hitʹtites, the Amʹor·ites, the Perʹiz·zites, the Hiʹvites, and the Jebʹu·sites, who were not part of Israel, 8 their descendants who were left in the land—those whom the Israelites had not exterminated—were conscripted by Solʹo·mon for forced labor until this day. 9 But Solʹo·mon did not make any of the Israelites slaves for his work, for they were his warriors, the chiefs of his adjutants, and the chiefs of his charioteers and horsemen. 10 There were 250 chiefs of the deputies of King Solʹo·mon, the foremen over the people.11 Solʹo·mon also brought Pharʹaoh’s daughter up from the City of David to the house that he had built for her, for he said: “Although she is my wife, she should not dwell in the house of King David of Israel, for the places to which the Ark of Jehovah has come are holy.”12 Then Solʹo·mon offered up burnt sacrifices to Jehovah on the altar of Jehovah that he had built in front of the porch. 13 He followed the daily routine and made offerings according to the commandment of Moses for the Sabbaths, the new moons, and the appointed festivals three times in the year—the Festival of Unleavened Bread, the Festival of Weeks, and the Festival of Booths. 14 Further, he appointed the divisions of the priests for their services according to the rule of his father David, and the Levites for their posts of duty, to praise and to minister in the presence of the priests according to the daily routine, and the gatekeepers in their divisions for the different gates, for such was the commandment of David, the man of the true God. 15 And they did not deviate from the king’s commandment to the priests and the Levites concerning any matter or concerning the storehouses. 16 So Solʹo·mon’s work was all well-organized, from the day the foundation of the house of Jehovah was laid until it was finished. So the house of Jehovah was completed.17 It was then that Solʹo·mon went to Eʹzi·on-geʹber and to Eʹloth on the seashore in the land of Eʹdom. 18 Hiʹram sent him ships and experienced seamen by means of his own servants. They went with Solʹo·mon’s servants to Oʹphir and took from there 450 talents of gold and brought it to King Solʹo·mon.
9 Now the queen of Sheʹba heard the report about Solʹo·mon, so she came to Jerusalem to test Solʹo·mon with perplexing questions. She was accompanied by a very impressive entourage, with camels carrying balsam oil and great quantities of gold and precious stones. She went in to Solʹo·mon and spoke to him about everything that was close to her heart. 2 Solʹo·mon then answered all her questions. There was nothing too difficult for Solʹo·mon to explain to her.3 When the queen of Sheʹba had seen Solʹo·mon’s wisdom, the house that he built, 4 the food of his table, the seating of his servants, the table service of his waiters and their attire, his cupbearers and their attire, and his burnt sacrifices that he regularly offered up at the house of Jehovah, she was left completely breathless. 5 So she said to the king: “The report that I heard in my own land about your achievements and about your wisdom was true. 6 But I did not put faith in the reports until I had come and had seen it with my own eyes. And look! I had not been told the half of your great wisdom. You have far surpassed the report that I heard. 7 Happy are your men, and happy are your servants who stand before you constantly, listening to your wisdom! 8 May Jehovah your God be praised, who has taken pleasure in you by putting you on his throne as king for Jehovah your God. Because your God loves Israel, in order to make it continue forever, he appointed you over it as king to administer justice and righteousness.”9 Then she gave the king 120 talents of gold and a great quantity of balsam oil and precious stones. Never again was such balsam oil brought in as what the queen of Sheʹba gave to King Solʹo·mon.10 Moreover, the servants of Hiʹram and the servants of Solʹo·mon who brought gold from Oʹphir also brought algum timbers and precious stones. 11 The king made from the algum timbers stairs for the house of Jehovah and for the king’s house, as well as harps and stringed instruments for the singers. Nothing like them had ever been seen before in the land of Judah.12 King Solʹo·mon also gave the queen of Sheʹba whatever she desired and asked for, more than what she had brought to the king. Then she left and returned to her own land, together with her servants.13 And the weight of the gold that came to Solʹo·mon in one year amounted to 666 talents of gold, 14 besides that brought in by the merchants and the traders and all the kings of the Arabs and the governors of the land who were bringing gold and silver in to Solʹo·mon.15 King Solʹo·mon made 200 large shields of alloyed gold (600 shekels of alloyed gold went on each shield) 16 and 300 bucklers of alloyed gold (three miʹnas of gold went on each buckler). Then the king put them in the House of the Forest of Lebʹa·non.17 The king also made a great ivory throne and overlaid it with pure gold. 18 There were six steps to the throne, and there was a gold footstool attached to the throne, and there were armrests on both sides of the seat, and two lions were standing beside the armrests. 19 And there were 12 lions standing on the six steps, one at each end of the six steps. No other kingdom had made anything like it. 20 All the drinking vessels of King Solʹo·mon were of gold, and all the utensils of the House of the Forest of Lebʹa·non were of pure gold. There was nothing made of silver, for silver was considered as nothing in the days of Solʹo·mon. 21 For the king’s ships would go to Tarʹshish with the servants of Hiʹram. Once every three years, the ships of Tarʹshish would come loaded with gold and silver, ivory, apes, and peacocks.22 So King Solʹo·mon was greater than all the other kings of the earth in riches and wisdom. 23 And the kings of all the earth sought an audience with Solʹo·mon to hear his wisdom that the true God had put in his heart. 24 They would each bring a gift—articles of silver, articles of gold, garments, armor, balsam oil, horses, and mules—and this continued year after year. 25 And Solʹo·mon had 4,000 stalls for his horses and chariots and 12,000 horses, and he kept them stationed in the chariot cities and close by the king in Jerusalem. 26 And he ruled over all the kings from the River to the land of the Phi·lisʹtines and to the boundary of Egypt. 27 The king made the silver in Jerusalem as plentiful as the stones, and cedarwood as plentiful as the sycamore trees in the She·pheʹlah. 28 And they would bring horses to Solʹo·mon from Egypt and from all the other lands.29 As for the rest of the history of Solʹo·mon, from beginning to end, is it not written among the words of Nathan the prophet, in the prophecy of A·hiʹjah the Shiʹlo·nite, and in the record of visions of Idʹdo the visionary concerning Jer·o·boʹam the son of Neʹbat? 30 Solʹo·mon reigned in Jerusalem over all Israel for 40 years. 31 Then Solʹo·mon was laid to rest with his forefathers. So they buried him in the City of David his father; and his son Re·ho·boʹam became king in his place.
1 Solʹo·mon the son of David grew ever stronger in his kingship, and Jehovah his God was with him and made him exceedingly great.2 Solʹo·mon sent for all Israel, the chiefs of the thousands and of the hundreds, the judges, and all the chieftains of all Israel, the heads of the paternal houses. 3 Then Solʹo·mon and all the congregation went to the high place at Gibʹe·on, for that was where the tent of meeting of the true God was, which tent Moses the servant of Jehovah had made in the wilderness. 4 However, David had brought the Ark of the true God up from Kirʹi·ath-jeʹa·rim to the place that David had prepared for it; he had pitched a tent for it in Jerusalem. 5 And the copper altar that Bezʹal·el the son of Uʹri the son of Hur had made had been put before the tabernacle of Jehovah; and Solʹo·mon and the congregation would pray before it. 6 Solʹo·mon now made offerings there before Jehovah, and he offered up 1,000 burnt offerings on the copper altar of the tent of meeting.7 That night God appeared to Solʹo·mon and said to him: “Ask what you would like me to give you.” 8 At this Solʹo·mon said to God: “You have shown great loyal love toward my father David, and you have made me king in his place. 9 Now, O Jehovah God, let your promise to David my father prove faithful, for you have made me king over a people as numerous as the dust particles of the earth. 10 Give me now wisdom and knowledge to lead this people, for who can possibly judge this great people of yours?”11 Then God said to Solʹo·mon: “Because this is your heart’s desire and you have not asked for wealth, riches, and honor or for the death of those hating you, nor have you asked for a long life, but you have asked for wisdom and knowledge to judge my people over whom I have made you king, 12 wisdom and knowledge will be given you; but I will also give you wealth and riches and honor such as no kings before you have had and none after you will have.”13 So Solʹo·mon came from the high place at Gibʹe·on, from before the tent of meeting, to Jerusalem; and he reigned over Israel. 14 Solʹo·mon kept accumulating chariots and horses; he had 1,400 chariots and 12,000 horses, and he kept them stationed in the chariot cities and close by the king in Jerusalem. 15 The king made the silver and the gold in Jerusalem as plentiful as the stones, and cedarwood as plentiful as the sycamore trees in the She·pheʹlah. 16 The horses of Solʹo·mon had been imported from Egypt, and the company of the king’s merchants would obtain the horses in droves for one price. 17 Each chariot imported from Egypt cost 600 silver pieces, and a horse cost 150; in turn, they would export them to all the kings of the Hitʹtites and the kings of Syria.
10 While Ezʹra was praying and making confession, weeping and lying prostrate before the house of the true God, a large crowd of men, women, and children of Israel gathered around him, for the people were weeping profusely. 2 Then Shec·a·niʹah the son of Je·hiʹel of the sons of Eʹlam said to Ezʹra: “We have acted unfaithfully against our God by marrying foreign women from the peoples of the land. Despite this, there is still hope for Israel. 3 Now let us make a covenant with our God to send away all the wives and those born from them, in harmony with the direction of Jehovah and of those who have reverence for the commandment of our God. Let us act according to the Law. 4 Get up, for this matter is your responsibility, and we are with you. Be strong and take action.”5 At that Ezʹra rose and had the chiefs of the priests, the Levites, and all Israel take an oath to do what had been said. So they took an oath. 6 Ezʹra now got up from before the house of the true God and went to the chamber of Je·ho·haʹnan the son of E·liʹa·shib. Although he went there, he ate no food and drank no water, for he was in mourning because of the unfaithfulness of the exiled people.7 Then they made a proclamation throughout Judah and Jerusalem that all the former exiles gather together at Jerusalem; 8 and according to the decision of the princes and the elders, anyone who did not come within three days’ time would have all his goods confiscated, and he would be banished from the congregation of the exiled people. 9 So all the men of Judah and Benjamin gathered together at Jerusalem within three days, that is, in the ninth month, on the 20th day of the month. All the people were sitting in a courtyard of the house of the true God, shivering because of the matter at hand and because of the heavy rain.10 Then Ezʹra the priest rose and said to them: “You have acted unfaithfully by marrying foreign women, and so you have added to the guilt of Israel. 11 Now make confession to Jehovah the God of your forefathers and do his will. Separate yourselves from the peoples of the land and from these foreign wives.” 12 To this the whole congregation answered with a loud voice: “It is our duty to do exactly as you say. 13 However, there are many people, and it is the rainy season. It is not possible to stand outside, and the matter will not take just one or two days, for we have rebelled extensively in this matter. 14 So, please, let our princes represent the entire congregation; and let all those in our cities who have married foreign women come at an appointed time, along with the elders and judges of each city, until we turn back the burning anger of our God from us concerning this matter.”15 However, Jonʹa·than the son of Asʹa·hel and Jah·zeiʹah the son of Tikʹvah objected to this, and the Levites Me·shulʹlam and Shabʹbe·thai supported them. 16 But the former exiles did what was agreed on; and Ezʹra the priest and the family heads of their paternal houses, all designated by name, convened separately on the first day of the tenth month to look into the matter; 17 and by the first day of the first month they finished dealing with all the men who had married foreign women. 18 And it was discovered that some of the sons of the priests had married foreign women: of the sons of Jeshʹu·a the son of Je·hozʹa·dak and his brothers, Ma·a·seiʹah, E·li·eʹzer, Jaʹrib, and Ged·a·liʹah. 19 But they promised to send their wives away, and since they were guilty, they would offer a ram of the flock for their guilt.20 Of the sons of Imʹmer, there were Ha·naʹni and Zeb·a·diʹah; 21 and of the sons of Haʹrim, Ma·a·seiʹah, E·liʹjah, She·maiʹah, Je·hiʹel, and Uz·ziʹah; 22 and of the sons of Pashʹhur, Eli·o·eʹnai, Ma·a·seiʹah, Ishʹma·el, Ne·thanʹel, Joʹza·bad and El·e·aʹsah. 23 And of the Levites, there were Joʹza·bad, Shimʹe·i, Ke·laiʹah (that is, Ke·liʹta), Peth·a·hiʹah, Judah, and E·li·eʹzer; 24 and of the singers, E·liʹa·shib; and of the gatekeepers, Shalʹlum, Teʹlem, and Uʹri.25 And of Israel, of the sons of Paʹrosh, there were Ra·miʹah, Iz·ziʹah, Mal·chiʹjah, Mijʹa·min, El·e·aʹzar, Mal·chiʹjah, and Be·naiʹah; 26 and of the sons of Eʹlam, Mat·ta·niʹah, Zech·a·riʹah, Je·hiʹel, Abʹdi, Jerʹe·moth, and E·liʹjah; 27 and of the sons of Zatʹtu, Eli·o·eʹnai, E·liʹa·shib, Mat·ta·niʹah, Jerʹe·moth, Zaʹbad, and A·ziʹza; 28 and of the sons of Beʹbai, Je·ho·haʹnan, Han·a·niʹah, Zabʹbai, and Athʹlai; 29 and of the sons of Baʹni, Me·shulʹlam, Malʹluch, A·daiʹah, Jaʹshub, Sheʹal, and Jerʹe·moth; 30 and of the sons of Paʹhath-moʹab, Adʹna, Cheʹlal, Be·naiʹah, Ma·a·seiʹah, Mat·ta·niʹah, Bezʹal·el, Binʹnu·i, and Ma·nasʹseh; 31 and of the sons of Haʹrim, E·li·eʹzer, Is·shiʹjah, Mal·chiʹjah, She·maiʹah, Shimʹe·on, 32 Benjamin, Malʹluch, and Shem·a·riʹah; 33 of the sons of Haʹshum, Mat·teʹnai, Matʹtat·tah, Zaʹbad, E·liphʹe·let, Jerʹe·mai, Ma·nasʹseh, and Shimʹe·i; 34 of the sons of Baʹni, Ma·a·daʹi, Amʹram, Uʹel, 35 Be·naiʹah, Be·deiʹah, Chelʹu·hi, 36 Va·niʹah, Merʹe·moth, E·liʹa·shib, 37 Mat·ta·niʹah, Mat·teʹnai, and Jaʹa·su; 38 and of the sons of Binʹnu·i, Shimʹe·i, 39 Shel·e·miʹah, Nathan, A·daiʹah, 40 Mach·nadʹe·bai, Shaʹshai, Shaʹrai, 41 Azʹar·el, Shel·e·miʹah, Shem·a·riʹah, 42 Shalʹlum, Am·a·riʹah, and Joseph; 43 and of the sons of Neʹbo, Je·iʹel, Mat·ti·thiʹah, Zaʹbad, Ze·biʹna, Jadʹdai, Joel, and Be·naiʹah. 44 All of these had taken foreign wives, and they sent their wives away, along with their sons.
2 And these were the people of the province who came up from the captives of the exile, those whom King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon had exiled to Babylon and who later returned to Jerusalem and Judah, each to his own city, 2 those who came with Ze·rubʹba·bel, Jeshʹu·a, Ne·he·miʹah, Se·raiʹah, Re·el·aiʹah, Morʹde·cai, Bilʹshan, Misʹpar, Bigʹvai, Reʹhum, and Baʹa·nah.The number of the Israelite men included: 3 the sons of Paʹrosh, 2,172; 4 the sons of Sheph·a·tiʹah, 372; 5 the sons of Aʹrah, 775; 6 the sons of Paʹhath-moʹab, of the sons of Jeshʹu·a and Joʹab, 2,812; 7 the sons of Eʹlam, 1,254; 8 the sons of Zatʹtu, 945; 9 the sons of Zacʹcai, 760; 10 the sons of Baʹni, 642; 11 the sons of Beʹbai, 623; 12 the sons of Azʹgad, 1,222; 13 the sons of Ad·o·niʹkam, 666; 14 the sons of Bigʹvai, 2,056; 15 the sons of Aʹdin, 454; 16 the sons of Aʹter, of Hez·e·kiʹah, 98; 17 the sons of Beʹzai, 323; 18 the sons of Joʹrah, 112; 19 the sons of Haʹshum, 223; 20 the sons of Gibʹbar, 95; 21 the sons of Bethʹle·hem, 123; 22 the men of Ne·toʹphah, 56; 23 the men of Anʹa·thoth, 128; 24 the sons of Azʹma·veth, 42; 25 the sons of Kirʹi·ath-jeʹa·rim, Che·phiʹrah, and Be·erʹoth, 743; 26 the sons of Raʹmah and Geʹba, 621; 27 the men of Michʹmas, 122; 28 the men of Bethʹel and Aʹi, 223; 29 the sons of Neʹbo, 52; 30 the sons of Magʹbish, 156; 31 the sons of the other Eʹlam, 1,254; 32 the sons of Haʹrim, 320; 33 the sons of Lod, Haʹdid, and Oʹno, 725; 34 the sons of Jerʹi·cho, 345; 35 the sons of Se·naʹah, 3,630.36 The priests: the sons of Je·daʹiah of the house of Jeshʹu·a, 973; 37 the sons of Imʹmer, 1,052; 38 the sons of Pashʹhur, 1,247; 39 the sons of Haʹrim, 1,017.40 The Levites: the sons of Jeshʹu·a and Kadʹmi·el, of the sons of Hod·a·viʹah, 74. 41 The singers: the sons of Aʹsaph, 128. 42 The sons of the gatekeepers: the sons of Shalʹlum, the sons of Aʹter, the sons of Talʹmon, the sons of Akʹkub, the sons of Ha·tiʹta, the sons of Shoʹbai, altogether 139.43 The temple servants: the sons of Ziʹha, the sons of Ha·suʹpha, the sons of Tab·baʹoth, 44 the sons of Keʹros, the sons of Siʹa·ha, the sons of Paʹdon, 45 the sons of Le·baʹnah, the sons of Hagʹa·bah, the sons of Akʹkub, 46 the sons of Haʹgab, the sons of Salʹmai, the sons of Haʹnan, 47 the sons of Gidʹdel, the sons of Gaʹhar, the sons of Re·aʹiah, 48 the sons of Reʹzin, the sons of Ne·koʹda, the sons of Gazʹzam, 49 the sons of Uzʹza, the sons of Pa·seʹah, the sons of Beʹsai, 50 the sons of Asʹnah, the sons of Me·uʹnim, the sons of Ne·phuʹsim, 51 the sons of Bakʹbuk, the sons of Ha·kuʹpha, the sons of Harʹhur, 52 the sons of Bazʹluth, the sons of Me·hiʹda, the sons of Harʹsha, 53 the sons of Barʹkos, the sons of Sisʹe·ra, the sons of Teʹmah, 54 the sons of Ne·ziʹah, the sons of Ha·tiʹpha.55 The sons of the servants of Solʹo·mon: the sons of Soʹtai, the sons of So·pheʹreth, the sons of Pe·ruʹda, 56 the sons of Jaʹa·lah, the sons of Darʹkon, the sons of Gidʹdel, 57 the sons of Sheph·a·tiʹah, the sons of Hatʹtil, the sons of Poʹche·reth-haz·ze·baʹim, the sons of Aʹmi.58 All the temple servants and the sons of the servants of Solʹo·mon were 392.59 And these went up from Tel-meʹlah, Tel-harʹsha, Cheʹrub, Adʹdon, and Imʹmer, but they were unable to verify their paternal house and their origin, as to whether they were Israelites: 60 the sons of De·laʹiah, the sons of To·biʹah, the sons of Ne·koʹda, 652. 61 And of the sons of the priests: the sons of Ha·baiʹah, the sons of Hakʹkoz, the sons of Bar·zilʹlai, who took a wife from the daughters of Bar·zilʹlai the Gilʹe·ad·ite and was called by their name. 62 These looked for their records to establish their genealogy, but they did not find them, so they were disqualified from the priesthood. 63 The governor told them that they could not eat from the most holy things until there was a priest who could consult the Uʹrim and Thumʹmim.64 The total number of the entire congregation was 42,360, 65 apart from their male and female slaves, who were 7,337; they also had 200 male and female singers. 66 Their horses were 736, their mules 245, 67 their camels 435, their donkeys 6,720.68 When they arrived at the house of Jehovah in Jerusalem, some of the heads of the paternal houses made voluntary offerings for the house of the true God, to rebuild it on its own site. 69 According to their means, they gave to the project treasury 61,000 gold drachmas, 5,000 silver miʹnas, and 100 robes for the priests. 70 And the priests, the Levites, some of the people, the singers, the gatekeepers, and the temple servants settled in their cities, and all the rest of Israel settled in their cities.
3 When the seventh month arrived and the Israelites were in their cities, they gathered together with one accord in Jerusalem. 2 Jeshʹu·a the son of Je·hozʹa·dak and his fellow priests and Ze·rubʹba·bel the son of She·alʹti·el and his brothers rose up and built the altar of the God of Israel, so that they could offer up burnt sacrifices on it, as it is written in the Law of Moses the man of the true God.3 So they set the altar up on its former site, despite their fear of the peoples of the surrounding lands, and they began offering up burnt sacrifices to Jehovah on it, the morning and the evening burnt sacrifices. 4 Then they held the Festival of Booths according to what is written, and day by day they offered up the specified number of burnt sacrifices that were required each day. 5 Afterward they offered up the regular burnt offering and the offerings for the new moons and those for all the sanctified festival seasons of Jehovah, as well as those from everyone who willingly offered a voluntary offering to Jehovah. 6 From the first day of the seventh month they started to offer up burnt sacrifices to Jehovah, though the foundation of Jehovah’s temple had not yet been laid.7 They gave money to the stonecutters and the craftsmen, and food and drink and oil to the Si·doʹni·ans and the Tyrʹi·ans for bringing cedar timbers by sea from Lebʹa·non to Jopʹpa, according to the authorization granted them by King Cyrus of Persia.8 In the second year after they came to the house of the true God at Jerusalem, in the second month, Ze·rubʹba·bel the son of She·alʹti·el, Jeshʹu·a the son of Je·hozʹa·dak and the rest of their brothers, the priests and the Levites, and all those who had come to Jerusalem out of the captivity started the work; they appointed the Levites from 20 years old and up to serve as supervisors over the work of the house of Jehovah. 9 So Jeshʹu·a, his sons and his brothers, and Kadʹmi·el and his sons, the sons of Judah, joined together to supervise those doing the work in the house of the true God, along with the sons of Henʹa·dad, their sons and their brothers, the Levites.10 When the builders laid the foundation of the temple of Jehovah, then the priests in official clothing, with the trumpets, and the Levites, the sons of Aʹsaph, with the cymbals, stood up to praise Jehovah according to the direction of King David of Israel. 11 And they began to sing in response by praising and giving thanks to Jehovah, “for he is good; his loyal love toward Israel endures forever.” Then all the people shouted with a loud shout of praise to Jehovah because the foundation of the house of Jehovah had been laid. 12 Many of the priests, the Levites, and the heads of the paternal houses—the old men who had seen the former house—wept with a loud voice when they saw the foundation of this house being laid, while many others shouted joyfully at the top of their voice. 13 So the people could not distinguish the sound of the joyful shouts from the sound of the weeping, for the people were shouting so loudly that the sound was heard from a great distance.
4 When the enemies of Judah and Benjamin heard that the returned exiles were building a temple to Jehovah the God of Israel, 2 they immediately approached Ze·rubʹba·bel and the heads of the paternal houses and said to them: “Let us build along with you; for like you, we worship your God and we have been sacrificing to him since the days of King Eʹsar-hadʹdon of As·syrʹi·a, who brought us here.” 3 However, Ze·rubʹba·bel and Jeshʹu·a and the rest of the heads of the paternal houses of Israel said to them: “You have no share with us in building a house to our God, for we alone will build it to Jehovah the God of Israel, just as King Cyrus the king of Persia has commanded us.”4 Then the people of the land were continually discouraging the people of Judah and disheartening them from building. 5 They hired advisers against them to frustrate their plans all the days of King Cyrus of Persia until the reign of King Da·riʹus of Persia. 6 At the beginning of the reign of A·has·u·eʹrus, they wrote an accusation against the inhabitants of Judah and Jerusalem. 7 And in the days of King Ar·ta·xerxʹes of Persia, Bishʹlam, Mithʹre·dath, Tabʹe·el, and the rest of his colleagues wrote to Ar·ta·xerxʹes the king; they translated the letter into Ar·a·maʹic, writing it with Ar·a·maʹic characters.8  Reʹhum the chief government official and Shimʹshai the scribe wrote a letter against Jerusalem to King Ar·ta·xerxʹes, as follows: 9 (It was from Reʹhum the chief government official and Shimʹshai the scribe and the rest of their colleagues, the judges and the lesser governors, the secretaries, the people of Eʹrech, the Babylonians, the inhabitants of Suʹsa, that is, the Eʹlam·ites, 10 and the rest of the nations that the great and honorable Asʹe·nap·par took into exile and settled in the cities of Sa·marʹi·a, and the rest in the region Beyond the River, and now 11 this is a copy of the letter that they sent him.)“To King Ar·ta·xerxʹes from your servants, the men of the region Beyond the River: And now 12 let it be known to the king that the Jews who came up here from you to us have arrived at Jerusalem. They are rebuilding the rebellious and wicked city, and they are finishing the walls and repairing the foundations. 13 Now let it be known to the king that if this city should be rebuilt and its walls finished, they will not give tax, tribute, or toll, and it will result in a loss to the treasuries of the kings. 14 Since we eat the salt of the palace and it is not proper for us to see the king’s interests harmed, we have therefore sent to make this known to the king, 15 so that there may be an investigation of the book of records of your ancestors. You will find in the book of records and learn that this city is a rebellious city, injurious to kings and provinces, and within it have been those stirring up sedition from ancient times. That is why this city was destroyed. 16 We are making known to the king that if this city is rebuilt and its walls are finished, you will have no control of the region Beyond the River.”17 The king sent word to Reʹhum the chief government official and Shimʹshai the scribe and the rest of their colleagues who were dwelling in Sa·marʹi·a and the rest of the region Beyond the River:“Greetings! And now 18 the official document that you sent us has been clearly read before me. 19 By my order an investigation was made, and it was found that from long ago the city has had uprisings against kings, and rebellions and revolts have taken place there. 20 There were powerful kings over Jerusalem who ruled the whole region Beyond the River, and tax, tribute, and toll were paid to them. 21 Now issue an order for these men to stop work, so that the city may not be rebuilt until I issue an order. 22 Be careful not to neglect acting in this regard, so that the king’s interests are not harmed any further.”23 Now after the copy of the official document of King Ar·ta·xerxʹes had been read before Reʹhum and Shimʹshai the scribe and their colleagues, they quickly went to Jerusalem to the Jews and used force to stop them. 24 It was then that the work on the house of God, which was in Jerusalem, came to a halt; and it remained at a standstill until the second year of the reign of King Da·riʹus of Persia.
5 Then the prophets Hagʹgai and Zech·a·riʹah the grandson of Idʹdo prophesied to the Jews who were in Judah and in Jerusalem, in the name of the God of Israel who was over them. 2 It was then that Ze·rubʹba·bel the son of She·alʹti·el and Jeshʹu·a the son of Je·hozʹa·dak started to rebuild the house of God, which was in Jerusalem; and the prophets of God were with them and supported them. 3 At that time Tatʹte·nai the governor of the region Beyond the River and Sheʹthar-bozʹe·nai and their colleagues came to them and asked them: “Who issued an order to you to build this house and to finish this structure?” 4 Then they asked them: “What are the names of the men who are working on this building?” 5 But God was watching over the elders of the Jews, and they did not stop them until the report could be sent to Da·riʹus and an official document could be sent back concerning this.6 Here is a copy of the letter that Tatʹte·nai the governor of the region Beyond the River and Sheʹthar-bozʹe·nai and his colleagues, the lesser governors of the region Beyond the River, sent to King Da·riʹus; 7 they sent the report to him, and this is what they wrote:“To King Da·riʹus:“All peace! 8 Let it be known to the king that we went to the province of Judah to the house of the great God, and it is being built with large stones rolled into place, and timbers are being laid in the walls. The work is being eagerly done by the people and is making progress through their efforts. 9 Then we questioned their elders, asking them: ‘Who issued an order to you to build this house and to finish this structure?’ 10 We also asked them their names to inform you, so that we could write the names of the men who are taking the lead.11 “This is the response they gave us: ‘We are the servants of the God of the heavens and the earth, and we are rebuilding the house that was built many years ago, which a great king of Israel built and finished. 12 However, because our fathers angered the God of the heavens, he gave them into the hand of King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon, the Chal·deʹan, who demolished this house and took the people into exile to Babylon. 13 Nevertheless, in the first year of King Cyrus of Babylon, King Cyrus issued an order to rebuild this house of God. 14 Moreover, King Cyrus took out of the temple of Babylon the gold and silver vessels of the house of God that Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar had taken from the temple in Jerusalem and had brought to the temple of Babylon. They were given to a man named Shesh·bazʹzar, whom Cyrus made governor. 15 Cyrus said to him: “Take these vessels. Go, deposit them in the temple that is in Jerusalem, and let the house of God be rebuilt in its former place.” 16 Then this Shesh·bazʹzar came, and he laid the foundations of the house of God, which is in Jerusalem; and it has been under construction from then until now, but it has not been completed.’17 “Now if it seems good to the king, let an investigation be made in the royal treasury there in Babylon, to determine whether King Cyrus issued an order to rebuild that house of God in Jerusalem; and let the decision of the king concerning this be sent to us.”
6 It was then that King Da·riʹus issued an order, and they made an investigation in the archives where the treasures were deposited in Babylon. 2 And a scroll was found in the citadel at Ec·batʹa·na, in the province of Meʹdi·a, and the following memorandum was written on it:3 “In the first year of King Cyrus, King Cyrus issued an order concerning the house of God in Jerusalem: ‘Let the house be rebuilt as the place where they are to offer sacrifices, and its foundations are to be set in place; its height is to be 60 cubits, its width 60 cubits, 4 with three layers of large stones rolled into place and one layer of timbers; and let the expense be paid from the king’s house. 5 Also, let the gold and silver vessels of the house of God that Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar took out of the temple that was in Jerusalem and brought to Babylon be returned, so that they may be put in their place in the temple in Jerusalem and be deposited in the house of God.’6 “So now Tatʹte·nai the governor of the region Beyond the River, Sheʹthar-bozʹe·nai, and your colleagues, the lesser governors of the region Beyond the River—stay away from there. 7 Do not interfere with the work on that house of God. The governor of the Jews and the elders of the Jews will rebuild that house of God in its former place. 8 Furthermore, I am issuing an order as to what you are to do for these elders of the Jews for rebuilding that house of God: From the royal treasury, from the tax collected in the region Beyond the River, the expenses are to be promptly given to these men to continue without interruption. 9 And whatever is needed—young bulls as well as rams and lambs for the burnt offerings to the God of heaven, wheat, salt, wine, and oil, just as the priests who are in Jerusalem say—is to be given them continually day by day without fail, 10 so that they may continually present offerings that please the God of the heavens and pray for the life of the king and his sons. 11 I have also issued an order that if anyone violates this decree, a timber will be pulled out of his house and he will be lifted up and fastened to it, and his house will be turned into a public latrine for this offense. 12 And may the God who has caused his name to reside there overthrow any king and people who lift a hand to violate this order and destroy that house of God, which is in Jerusalem. I, Da·riʹus, issue this order. Let it be done promptly.”13 Then Tatʹte·nai the governor of the region Beyond the River, Sheʹthar-bozʹe·nai, and their colleagues promptly carried out everything that King Da·riʹus had ordered. 14 And the elders of the Jews continued building and making progress, urged on by the prophesying of Hagʹgai the prophet and Zech·a·riʹah the grandson of Idʹdo; they finished building it by the order of the God of Israel and by the order of Cyrus and Da·riʹus and King Ar·ta·xerxʹes of Persia. 15 They completed the house by the third day of the month of Aʹdar, in the sixth year of the reign of King Da·riʹus.16 Then the Israelites, the priests, the Levites, and the rest of the former exiles held the inauguration of this house of God with joy. 17 And they presented for the inauguration of this house of God 100 bulls, 200 rams, 400 lambs, and as a sin offering for all Israel 12 male goats, corresponding to the number of the tribes of Israel. 18 And they appointed the priests in their groups and the Levites in their divisions for the service of God in Jerusalem, according to what is written in the book of Moses.19 And the former exiles held the Passover on the 14th day of the first month. 20 The priests and the Levites, without exception, had cleansed themselves, so they were all clean; they slaughtered the Passover sacrifice for all the former exiles, for their fellow priests, and for themselves. 21 Then the Israelites who had returned from the exile ate of it, along with everyone who had joined them and had separated himself from the uncleanness of the nations of the land to worship Jehovah the God of Israel. 22 They also joyfully held the Festival of Unleavened Bread for seven days, for Jehovah caused them to rejoice and he had made the heart of the king of As·syrʹi·a favorable toward them, so that he supported them in the work of the house of the true God, the God of Israel.
7 After these things, during the reign of King Ar·ta·xerxʹes of Persia, Ezʹra returned. He was the son of Se·raiʹah, son of Az·a·riʹah, son of Hil·kiʹah, 2 son of Shalʹlum, son of Zaʹdok, son of A·hiʹtub, 3 son of Am·a·riʹah, son of Az·a·riʹah, son of Me·raʹioth, 4 son of Zer·a·hiʹah, son of Uzʹzi, son of Bukʹki, 5 son of Ab·i·shuʹa, son of Phinʹe·has, son of El·e·aʹzar, son of Aaron the chief priest. 6 This Ezʹra came up from Babylon. He was a copyist who was well-versed in the Law of Moses, which Jehovah the God of Israel had given. The king granted everything he requested, for the hand of Jehovah his God was upon him.7 Some of the Israelites, the priests, the Levites, the singers, the gatekeepers, and the temple servants, went up to Jerusalem in the seventh year of King Ar·ta·xerxʹes. 8 And Ezʹra came to Jerusalem in the fifth month, in the seventh year of the king. 9 On the first day of the first month, he began the journey from Babylon, and he arrived in Jerusalem on the first day of the fifth month, for the good hand of his God was upon him. 10 Ezʹra had prepared his heart to consult the Law of Jehovah and to practice it, and to teach its regulations and judgments in Israel.11 This is a copy of the letter that King Ar·ta·xerxʹes gave to Ezʹra the priest and copyist, an expert in the study of the commandments of Jehovah and of his regulations to Israel:12  “Ar·ta·xerxʹes, the king of kings, to Ezʹra the priest, the copyist of the Law of the God of the heavens: May you have perfect peace. And now 13 I have issued an order that everyone in my realm of the people of Israel and their priests and Levites who is willing to go with you to Jerusalem should go. 14 For you are sent by the king and his seven advisers to investigate whether the Law of your God, which is with you, is being applied in Judah and Jerusalem, 15 and to take the silver and the gold that the king and his advisers have voluntarily given to the God of Israel, whose residence is in Jerusalem, 16 with all the silver and the gold that you receive in all the province of Babylon, along with the gift that the people and the priests voluntarily give to the house of their God, which is in Jerusalem. 17 And you are to buy promptly with this money bulls, rams, lambs, along with their grain offerings and their drink offerings, and you are to present them on the altar of the house of your God in Jerusalem.18 “And whatever seems good to you and to your brothers to do, you may do with the rest of the silver and the gold, according to the will of your God. 19 And all the vessels that are given to you for the service of the house of your God, you are to deliver before God at Jerusalem. 20 And the rest of the necessities of the house of your God that you are required to give, you will give out of the royal treasury.21 “I, King Ar·ta·xerxʹes, have issued an order to all the treasurers in the region Beyond the River, that everything that Ezʹra the priest, the copyist of the Law of the God of the heavens, requests of you is to be done promptly, 22 up to 100 talents of silver, 100 cor measures of wheat, 100 bath measures of wine, 100 bath measures of oil, and salt without limit. 23 Let everything that is ordered by the God of the heavens be done with zeal for the house of the God of the heavens, so that there may be no wrath against the king’s realm and his sons. 24 And you are further advised that it is not permitted to impose any tax, tribute, or toll on any of the priests and Levites, musicians, doorkeepers, temple servants, and workers of this house of God.25 “And you, Ezʹra, according to the wisdom that you possess from your God, appoint magistrates and judges to judge all the people in the region Beyond the River, all those who know the laws of your God; and you should instruct anyone who does not know them. 26 And everyone who does not observe the Law of your God and the law of the king should have judgment executed on him promptly, whether it is death, banishment, a fine, or imprisonment.”27 May Jehovah the God of our forefathers be praised, who put it into the heart of the king to beautify the house of Jehovah in Jerusalem! 28 And he has shown me loyal love before the king and his advisers and all the mighty princes of the king. So I took courage because the hand of Jehovah my God was upon me, and I gathered out of Israel leading men to go up with me.
8 Now these were the heads of their paternal houses and the genealogical enrollment of those who went up with me out of Babylon during the reign of King Ar·ta·xerxʹes: 2 of the sons of Phinʹe·has, Gerʹshom; of the sons of Ithʹa·mar, Daniel; of the sons of David, Hatʹtush; 3 of the sons of Shec·a·niʹah, of the sons of Paʹrosh, Zech·a·riʹah, and with him there was an enrollment of 150 males; 4 of the sons of Paʹhath-moʹab, Elʹie·ho-eʹnai the son of Zer·a·hiʹah, and with him 200 males; 5 of the sons of Zatʹtu, Shec·a·niʹah the son of Ja·ha·ziʹel, and with him 300 males; 6 of the sons of Aʹdin, Eʹbed the son of Jonʹa·than, and with him 50 males; 7 of the sons of Eʹlam, Je·shaʹiah the son of Ath·a·liʹah, and with him 70 males; 8 of the sons of Sheph·a·tiʹah, Zeb·a·diʹah the son of Miʹcha·el, and with him 80 males; 9 of the sons of Joʹab, O·ba·diʹah the son of Je·hiʹel, and with him 218 males; 10 of the sons of Baʹni, She·loʹmith the son of Jo·si·phiʹah, and with him 160 males; 11 of the sons of Beʹbai, Zech·a·riʹah the son of Beʹbai, and with him 28 males; 12 of the sons of Azʹgad, Jo·haʹnan the son of Hakʹka·tan, and with him 110 males; 13 of the sons of Ad·o·niʹkam, those who were the last, and these were their names: E·liphʹe·let, Je·iʹel, and She·maiʹah, and with them 60 males; 14 and of the sons of Bigʹvai, Uʹthai and Zabʹbud, and with them 70 males.15 I assembled them at the river that comes to A·haʹva, and we camped there for three days. But when I examined the people and the priests, I did not find any of the Levites there. 16 So I sent for E·li·eʹzer, Arʹi·el, She·maiʹah, El·naʹthan, Jaʹrib, El·naʹthan, Nathan, Zech·a·riʹah, and Me·shulʹlam, who were leading men, and for Joiʹa·rib and El·naʹthan, who were instructors. 17 Then I gave them a command concerning Idʹdo the leader in the place called Ca·si·phiʹa. I told them to tell Idʹdo and his brothers, the temple servants who were in Ca·si·phiʹa, to bring to us ministers for the house of our God. 18 Since the good hand of our God was upon us, they brought a discreet man from the sons of Mahʹli the grandson of Leʹvi the son of Israel, namely, She·re·biʹah, and his sons and his brothers, 18 men; 19 and Hash·a·biʹah, and with him Je·shaʹiah from the Me·rarʹites, his brothers and their sons, 20 men. 20 And there were 220 of the temple servants, whom David and the princes gave to the service of the Levites, all of whom had been designated by name.21 Then I proclaimed a fast there at the river A·haʹva, to humble ourselves before our God, to seek guidance from him for our journey, for us and for our children and for all our goods. 22 I was ashamed to ask the king for soldiers and horsemen to protect us against the enemies along the way, because we had said to the king: “The good hand of our God is over all those seeking him, but his strength and his anger are against all those abandoning him.” 23 So we fasted and made request of our God concerning this, and he listened to our entreaty.24 I now set apart 12 of the chiefs of the priests, namely, She·re·biʹah and Hash·a·biʹah, along with ten of their brothers. 25 Then I weighed out to them the silver and the gold and the utensils, the contribution that the king and his advisers and his princes and all the Israelites who were present there had made to the house of our God. 26 Thus I weighed out into their hand 650 talents of silver, 100 silver utensils worth 2 talents, 100 talents of gold, 27 20 small gold bowls worth 1,000 darics, and 2 utensils of fine copper, gleaming red, as desirable as gold.28 Then I said to them: “You are holy to Jehovah, and the utensils are holy, and the silver and the gold are a voluntary offering to Jehovah the God of your forefathers. 29 Guard them carefully until you weigh them out before the chiefs of the priests and the Levites and the princes of the paternal houses of Israel in Jerusalem, in the chambers of the house of Jehovah.” 30 And the priests and the Levites took the silver and the gold and the utensils that had been weighed out to them, in order to bring them to Jerusalem to the house of our God.31 Finally we pulled away from the river A·haʹva on the 12th day of the first month to go to Jerusalem, and the hand of our God was over us, and he rescued us from the hand of the enemy and from ambush along the way. 32 So we came to Jerusalem and stayed there for three days. 33 And on the fourth day, we weighed out the silver and the gold and the utensils in the house of our God and handed them over to Merʹe·moth son of U·riʹjah the priest, and with him was El·e·aʹzar son of Phinʹe·has, and with them were the Levites Joʹza·bad son of Jeshʹu·a and No·a·diʹah son of Binʹnu·i. 34 Everything was numbered and weighed, and all the weight was recorded. 35 Those coming out of the captivity, the former exiles, presented burnt sacrifices to the God of Israel, 12 bulls for all Israel, 96 rams, 77 male lambs, and 12 male goats as a sin offering; all of this was a burnt offering to Jehovah.36 Then we gave the decrees of the king to the satraps of the king and the governors of the region Beyond the River, and they supported the people and the house of the true God.
9 And as soon as these things had been done, the princes approached me and said: “The people of Israel and the priests and the Levites have not separated themselves from the peoples of the lands and their detestable practices, those of the Caʹnaan·ites, the Hitʹtites, the Perʹiz·zites, the Jebʹu·sites, the Amʹmon·ites, the Moʹab·ites, the Egyptians, and the Amʹor·ites. 2 They have taken some of their daughters as wives for themselves and for their sons. Now they, the holy offspring, have become mingled with the peoples of the lands. The princes and the deputy rulers have been the foremost offenders in this unfaithfulness.”3 Now as soon as I heard of this, I ripped apart my garment and my sleeveless coat and pulled out some of the hair of my head and my beard, and I sat down in shock. 4 Then everyone who had reverence for the words of the God of Israel gathered around me because of the unfaithfulness of the exiled people, while I was sitting in shock until the evening grain offering.5 And at the time of the evening grain offering, I stood up from my humiliation, with my garment and my sleeveless coat torn apart, and I got down on my knees and spread out my hands to Jehovah my God. 6 And I said: “O my God, I feel ashamed and embarrassed to raise my face to you, O my God, for our errors have multiplied over our heads and our guilt has mounted up to the heavens. 7 From the days of our forefathers until this day our guilt has been great; and because of our errors, we, our kings, and our priests have been given into the hand of the kings of the lands, to the sword, to captivity, to plunder, and to disgrace, as is the case today. 8 But now for a brief moment, favor has come from Jehovah our God by letting a remnant escape and by giving us a secure position in his holy place, to make our eyes shine, O our God, and to revive us a little in our slavery. 9 For although we are slaves, our God has not abandoned us in our slavery; but he has extended his loyal love toward us before the kings of Persia, to revive us so as to raise up the house of our God and to restore its ruins and to give us a stone wall in Judah and in Jerusalem.10 “But now what can we say, O our God, after this? For we have left your commandments, 11 which you gave us through your servants the prophets, saying: ‘The land that you are going in to take possession of is an impure land because of the impurity of the peoples of the lands, because of their detestable practices with which they have filled it from end to end with their uncleanness. 12 Therefore, do not give your daughters to their sons, neither accept their daughters for your sons; and you must never seek their peace and their prosperity, so that you may grow strong and eat the good of the land and take possession of it for your sons forever.’ 13 And after all that has come upon us for our bad deeds and our great guilt—for you, O our God, have not dealt with us according to our error, and you have allowed those of us here to escape— 14 are we to break your commandments again and form marriage alliances with the peoples who practice these detestable things? Would you not become so angry with us that you would completely destroy us, leaving no remnant or survivor? 15 O Jehovah the God of Israel, you are righteous, for we have survived as a remnant to this day. Here we are before you in our guilt, for it is impossible to stand before you because of this.”
1 In the first year of King Cyrus of Persia, in order that Jehovah’s word spoken by Jeremiah would be fulfilled, Jehovah stirred the spirit of King Cyrus of Persia to make a proclamation throughout his kingdom, which he also put in writing, saying:2 “This is what King Cyrus of Persia says, ‘Jehovah the God of the heavens has given me all the kingdoms of the earth, and he has commissioned me to build him a house in Jerusalem, which is in Judah. 3 Whoever there is among you of all his people, may his God be with him, and let him go up to Jerusalem, which is in Judah, and rebuild the house of Jehovah the God of Israel—he is the true God—whose house was in Jerusalem. 4 Anyone who is residing as a foreigner, wherever he may be, let him be helped by his neighbors by their giving him silver and gold, goods and livestock, along with the voluntary offering for the house of the true God, which was in Jerusalem.’”5 Then the heads of the paternal houses of Judah and of Benjamin and the priests and the Levites—everyone whose spirit the true God had stirred—prepared to go up and rebuild the house of Jehovah, which was in Jerusalem. 6 All those around them supported them by giving them utensils of silver and of gold, goods, livestock, and valuable things, besides all the voluntary offerings.7 King Cyrus also brought out the utensils of the house of Jehovah that Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar had taken from Jerusalem and had put in the house of his god. 8 King Cyrus of Persia brought them out under the supervision of Mithʹre·dath the treasurer, who made an inventory of them for Shesh·bazʹzar the chieftain of Judah.9 Now this was the inventory: 30 basket-shaped vessels of gold, 1,000 basket-shaped vessels of silver, 29 replacement vessels, 10 30 small gold bowls, 410 small silver bowls, 1,000 other utensils. 11 All the utensils of gold and of silver were 5,400. Shesh·bazʹzar brought all of these up when the exiles were brought out of Babylon to Jerusalem.
10 Those who attested it by putting their seal to it were:Ne·he·miʹah the governor, the son of Hac·a·liʹah,And Zed·e·kiʹah, 2 Se·raiʹah, Az·a·riʹah, Jeremiah, 3 Pashʹhur, Am·a·riʹah, Mal·chiʹjah, 4 Hatʹtush, Sheb·a·niʹah, Malʹluch, 5 Haʹrim, Merʹe·moth, O·ba·diʹah, 6 Daniel, Ginʹne·thon, Barʹuch, 7 Me·shulʹlam, A·biʹjah, Mijʹa·min, 8 Ma·a·ziʹah, Bilʹgai, and She·maiʹah; these are the priests.9 Also the Levites: Jeshʹu·a the son of Az·a·niʹah, Binʹnu·i of the sons of Henʹa·dad, Kadʹmi·el, 10 and their brothers Sheb·a·niʹah, Ho·diʹah, Ke·liʹta, Pe·laʹiah, Haʹnan, 11 Miʹca, Reʹhob, Hash·a·biʹah, 12 Zacʹcur, She·re·biʹah, Sheb·a·niʹah, 13 Ho·diʹah, Baʹni, and Be·niʹnu.14 The heads of the people: Paʹrosh, Paʹhath-moʹab, Eʹlam, Zatʹtu, Baʹni, 15 Bunʹni, Azʹgad, Beʹbai, 16 Ad·o·niʹjah, Bigʹvai, Aʹdin, 17 Aʹter, Hez·e·kiʹah, Azʹzur, 18 Ho·diʹah, Haʹshum, Beʹzai, 19 Haʹriph, Anʹa·thoth, Neʹbai, 20 Magʹpi·ash, Me·shulʹlam, Heʹzir, 21 Me·shezʹa·bel, Zaʹdok, Jadʹdu·a, 22 Pel·a·tiʹah, Haʹnan, A·naiʹah, 23 Ho·sheʹa, Han·a·niʹah, Hasʹshub, 24 Hal·loʹhesh, Pilʹha, Shoʹbek, 25 Reʹhum, Ha·shabʹnah, Ma·a·seiʹah, 26 A·hiʹjah, Haʹnan, Aʹnan, 27 Malʹluch, Haʹrim, and Baʹa·nah.28 The rest of the people—the priests, the Levites, the gatekeepers, the singers, the temple servants, and everyone who separated himself from the peoples of the lands to follow the Law of the true God, along with their wives, their sons, and their daughters, all those with knowledge and understanding— 29 joined their brothers, their prominent men, and bound themselves with a curse and an oath, to walk in the Law of the true God, which had been given through Moses the servant of the true God, and to observe carefully all the commandments of Jehovah our Lord, his judgments, and his regulations. 30 We will not give our daughters to the peoples of the land, and we will not take their daughters for our sons.31 If the peoples of the land bring in their wares and every kind of grain to sell on the Sabbath day, we will not buy anything from them on the Sabbath or on a holy day. We will also forgo the produce of the seventh year and every outstanding debt.32 Also, we imposed the obligation on ourselves for each of us to give a third of a shekel yearly for the service of the house of our God, 33 for the layer bread, the regular grain offering, the regular burnt offering of the Sabbaths and the new moons, and for the appointed feasts, for the holy things, for the sin offerings to make atonement for Israel, and for all the work of the house of our God.34 Also, we cast lots concerning the supply of the wood that the priests, the Levites, and the people should bring to the house of our God by our paternal houses, at the appointed times, year by year, to burn on the altar of Jehovah our God, according to what is written in the Law. 35 We will also bring the first ripe fruits of our land and the first ripe fruits of every sort of fruit tree, year by year, to the house of Jehovah, 36 as well as the firstborn of our sons and of our livestock—according to what is written in the Law—and the firstborn of our herds and of our flocks. We will bring them to the house of our God, to the priests who minister at the house of our God. 37 Also, the firstfruits of our coarse meal, our contributions, the fruitage of every sort of tree, new wine, and oil, we should bring to the priests to the storerooms of the house of our God, along with the tenth from our land to the Levites, for the Levites are the ones who collect the tenths in all our agricultural cities.38 And the priest, the son of Aaron, must be with the Levites when the Levites collect the tenth; and the Levites should offer up a tenth of the tenth to the house of our God, to the rooms of the storehouse. 39 For it is to the storerooms that the Israelites and the sons of the Levites should bring the contribution of the grain, the new wine, and the oil, and that is where the utensils of the sanctuary are, as well as the priests who minister, the gatekeepers, and the singers. We will not neglect the house of our God.
11 Now the princes of the people were living in Jerusalem; but the rest of the people cast lots to bring one out of every ten to live in Jerusalem, the holy city, while the other nine stayed in the other cities. 2 Moreover, the people blessed all the men who volunteered to live in Jerusalem.3 And these are the heads of the province who lived in Jerusalem. (The rest of Israel, the priests, the Levites, the temple servants, and the sons of the servants of Solʹo·mon, lived in the other cities of Judah, each one in his own possession in his city.4 Also, there lived in Jerusalem some of the people of Judah and of Benjamin.) Of the people of Judah were A·thaiʹah son of Uz·ziʹah son of Zech·a·riʹah son of Am·a·riʹah son of Sheph·a·tiʹah son of Ma·halʹa·lel of the sons of Peʹrez, 5 and Ma·a·seiʹah son of Barʹuch son of Col·hoʹzeh son of Ha·zaiʹah son of A·daiʹah son of Joiʹa·rib son of Zech·a·riʹah son of the She·laʹnite. 6 All the sons of Peʹrez who were dwelling in Jerusalem were 468 capable men.7 And these were the people of Benjamin: Salʹlu son of Me·shulʹlam son of Joʹed son of Pe·daiʹah son of Ko·laiʹah son of Ma·a·seiʹah son of Ithʹi·el son of Je·shaʹiah, 8 and after him Gab·baʹi and Sal·laʹi, 928; 9 and Joel the son of Zichʹri was their overseer, and Judah the son of Has·se·nuʹah was second in charge of the city.10 Of the priests: Je·daʹiah son of Joiʹa·rib, Jaʹchin, 11 Se·raiʹah son of Hil·kiʹah son of Me·shulʹlam son of Zaʹdok son of Me·raʹioth son of A·hiʹtub, a leader of the house of the true God, 12 and their brothers who did the work of the house, 822; and A·daiʹah son of Je·roʹham son of Pel·a·liʹah son of Amʹzi son of Zech·a·riʹah son of Pashʹhur son of Mal·chiʹjah, 13 and his brothers, heads of paternal houses, 242; and A·mashʹsai son of Azʹar·el son of Ahʹzai son of Me·shilʹle·moth son of Imʹmer, 14 and their brothers who were mighty, courageous men, 128; and their overseer was Zabʹdi·el, a member of a prominent family.15 And of the Levites: She·maiʹah son of Hasʹshub son of Az·riʹkam son of Hash·a·biʹah son of Bunʹni, 16 and Shabʹbe·thai and Joʹza·bad, of the heads of the Levites, who were in charge of the outside business of the house of the true God; 17 and Mat·ta·niʹah, son of Miʹcah son of Zabʹdi son of Aʹsaph, the conductor of the singing, who led the praises during prayer, and Bak·bu·kiʹah, the second of his brothers, and Abʹda son of Sham·muʹa son of Gaʹlal son of Je·duʹthun. 18 All the Levites in the holy city were 284.19 And the gatekeepers were Akʹkub, Talʹmon, and their brothers who kept guard in the gates, 172.20 The rest of Israel, the priests, and the Levites were in all the other cities of Judah, each in his own inherited property. 21 The temple servants were living in Oʹphel, and Ziʹha and Gishʹpa were in charge of the temple servants.22 The overseer of the Levites in Jerusalem was Uzʹzi son of Baʹni son of Hash·a·biʹah son of Mat·ta·niʹah son of Miʹca, of the sons of Aʹsaph, the singers; he was in charge of the work of the house of the true God. 23 For there was a royal order in their behalf, and there was a fixed provision for the singers as each day required. 24 And Peth·a·hiʹah son of Me·shezʹa·bel of the sons of Zeʹrah son of Judah was the king’s adviser for every matter of the people.25 Regarding the settlements with their fields, some of the people of Judah lived in Kirʹi·ath-arʹba and its dependent towns, in Diʹbon and its dependent towns, in Je·kabʹze·el and its settlements, 26 in Jeshʹu·a, in Mo·laʹdah, in Beth-pelʹet, 27 in Haʹzar-shuʹal, in Beʹer-sheʹba and its dependent towns, 28 in Zikʹlag, in Me·coʹnah and its dependent towns, 29 in En-rimʹmon, in Zoʹrah, and in Jarʹmuth, 30 in Za·noʹah, in A·dulʹlam and their settlements, in Laʹchish and its fields, and in A·zeʹkah and its dependent towns. They settled from Beʹer-sheʹba clear to the Valley of Hinʹnom.31 And the people of Benjamin were in Geʹba, Michʹmash, Aiʹja, Bethʹel and its dependent towns, 32 Anʹa·thoth, Nob, A·na·niʹah, 33 Haʹzor, Raʹmah, Gitʹta·im, 34 Haʹdid, Ze·boʹim, Ne·balʹlat, 35 Lod, and Oʹno, the valley of the craftsmen. 36 And some divisions of the Levites from Judah were assigned to Benjamin.
12 These were the priests and the Levites who went up with Ze·rubʹba·bel the son of She·alʹti·el, and Jeshʹu·a: Se·raiʹah, Jeremiah, Ezʹra, 2 Am·a·riʹah, Malʹluch, Hatʹtush, 3 Shec·a·niʹah, Reʹhum, Merʹe·moth, 4 Idʹdo, Ginʹne·thoi, A·biʹjah, 5 Mijʹa·min, Ma·a·diʹah, Bilʹgah, 6 She·maiʹah, Joiʹa·rib, Je·daʹiah, 7 Salʹlu, Aʹmok, Hil·kiʹah, and Je·daʹiah. These were the heads of the priests and their brothers in the days of Jeshʹu·a.8 The Levites were Jeshʹu·a, Binʹnu·i, Kadʹmi·el, She·re·biʹah, Judah, and Mat·ta·niʹah, who led the songs of thanksgiving along with his brothers. 9 And Bak·bu·kiʹah and Unʹni their brothers stood opposite them for guard duties. 10 Jeshʹu·a became father to Joiʹa·kim, and Joiʹa·kim became father to E·liʹa·shib, and E·liʹa·shib to Joiʹa·da. 11 And Joiʹa·da became father to Jonʹa·than, and Jonʹa·than became father to Jadʹdu·a.12 In the days of Joiʹa·kim, these were the priests, the heads of the paternal houses: for Se·raiʹah, Me·raiʹah; for Jeremiah, Han·a·niʹah; 13 for Ezʹra, Me·shulʹlam; for Am·a·riʹah, Je·ho·haʹnan; 14 for Malʹlu·chi, Jonʹa·than; for Sheb·a·niʹah, Joseph; 15 for Haʹrim, Adʹna; for Me·raʹioth, Helʹkai; 16 for Idʹdo, Zech·a·riʹah; for Ginʹne·thon, Me·shulʹlam; 17 for A·biʹjah, Zichʹri; for Mi·niʹa·min, . . .  ; for Mo·a·diʹah, Pilʹtai; 18 for Bilʹgah, Sham·muʹa; for She·maiʹah, Je·honʹa·than; 19 for Joiʹa·rib, Mat·teʹnai; for Je·daʹiah, Uzʹzi; 20 for Sal·laʹi, Kalʹlai; for Aʹmok, Eʹber; 21 for Hil·kiʹah, Hash·a·biʹah; for Je·daʹiah, Ne·thanʹel.22 The heads of the paternal houses of the Levites in the days of E·liʹa·shib, Joiʹa·da, Jo·haʹnan, and Jadʹdu·a were recorded, as were the priests, down to the kingship of Da·riʹus the Persian.23 The Levites who were heads of the paternal houses were recorded in the book of the history of the times, down to the days of Jo·haʹnan the son of E·liʹa·shib. 24 The heads of the Levites were Hash·a·biʹah, She·re·biʹah, and Jeshʹu·a the son of Kadʹmi·el, and their brothers stood opposite them to offer praise and give thanks according to the instructions of David the man of the true God, guard group corresponding to guard group. 25 Mat·ta·niʹah, Bak·bu·kiʹah, O·ba·diʹah, Me·shulʹlam, Talʹmon, and Akʹkub were standing guard as gatekeepers, guarding the storerooms by the gates. 26 These served in the days of Joiʹa·kim the son of Jeshʹu·a the son of Joʹza·dak and in the days of Ne·he·miʹah the governor and Ezʹra the priest and copyist.27 At the inauguration of the walls of Jerusalem, they sought the Levites and brought them to Jerusalem from all the places they lived to celebrate the inauguration with rejoicing, with songs of thanksgiving, and with cymbals, stringed instruments, and harps. 28 And the sons of the singers gathered together from the district, from all around Jerusalem, from the settlements of the Ne·tophʹa·thites, 29 from Beth-gilʹgal, and from the fields of Geʹba and Azʹma·veth, for the singers had built settlements for themselves all around Jerusalem. 30 And the priests and the Levites purified themselves, and they purified the people, the gates, and the wall.31 Then I brought the princes of Judah up on top of the wall. Further, I appointed two large thanksgiving choirs and processions, and the one walked to the right on the wall toward the Gate of the Ash Heaps. 32 Ho·shaiʹah and half of the princes of Judah walked behind them, 33 along with Az·a·riʹah, Ezʹra, Me·shulʹlam, 34 Judah, Benjamin, She·maiʹah, and Jeremiah. 35 With them were some of the sons of the priests with the trumpets: Zech·a·riʹah son of Jonʹa·than son of She·maiʹah son of Mat·ta·niʹah son of Mi·caiʹah son of Zacʹcur son of Aʹsaph, 36 and his brothers She·maiʹah, Azʹar·el, Milʹa·lai, Gilʹa·lai, Maʹai, Ne·thanʹel, Judah, and Ha·naʹni, with the musical instruments of David the man of the true God; and Ezʹra the copyist went before them. 37 At the Fountain Gate they went straight ahead up the Stairway of the City of David by the ascent of the wall above the House of David and on to the Water Gate to the east.38 The other thanksgiving choir walked in the opposite direction, and I followed it with half of the people, on the wall up over the Tower of the Ovens and on to the Broad Wall 39 and up over the Gate of Eʹphra·im and on to the Gate of the Old City and on to the Fish Gate, the Tower of Ha·nanʹel, the Tower of Meʹah, and on to the Sheep Gate; and they came to a halt at the Gate of the Guard.40 At length the two thanksgiving choirs stood before the house of the true God; so did I and half of the deputy rulers with me, 41 and the priests E·liʹa·kim, Ma·a·seiʹah, Mi·niʹa·min, Mi·caiʹah, Eli·o·eʹnai, Zech·a·riʹah, and Han·a·niʹah, with the trumpets, 42 and Ma·a·seiʹah, She·maiʹah, El·e·aʹzar, Uzʹzi, Je·ho·haʹnan, Mal·chiʹjah, Eʹlam, and Eʹzer. And the singers sang loudly under the oversight of Iz·ra·hiʹah.43 On that day they offered great sacrifices and rejoiced, for the true God made them rejoice with great joy. The women and the children also rejoiced, so that the rejoicing of Jerusalem could be heard far away.44 On that day men were appointed over the storehouses for the contributions, the firstfruits, and the tenths. Into them they were to gather from the fields of the cities the portions required by the Law for the priests and the Levites, for there was rejoicing in Judah because of the priests and the Levites who were ministering. 45 And they began taking care of the duties of their God and the obligation of the purification, as did the singers and the gatekeepers, according to the instructions of David and his son Solʹo·mon. 46 For long ago in the days of David and Aʹsaph, there were directors for the singers and for the songs of praise and thanksgiving to God. 47 And during the days of Ze·rubʹba·bel and during the days of Ne·he·miʹah, all Israel gave portions to the singers and the gatekeepers, according to the daily need. They also set aside the portion for the Levites, and the Levites set aside the portion for the descendants of Aaron.
13 On that day the book of Moses was read in the hearing of the people, and it was found written that no Amʹmon·ite or Moʹab·ite should ever enter the congregation of the true God, 2 for they had not met the Israelites with bread and water, but instead they had hired Baʹlaam against them to curse them. However, our God had changed the curse into a blessing. 3 As soon as they heard the Law, they began to separate from Israel all those of foreign descent.4 Now before this, the priest in charge of the storerooms of the house of our God was E·liʹa·shib, a relative of To·biʹah. 5 He had made available for him a large storeroom, where previously they used to put the grain offering, the frankincense, and the utensils and the tenth of the grain, the new wine, and the oil, to which the Levites, the singers, and the gatekeepers are entitled, along with the contribution for the priests.6 And during all this time I was not in Jerusalem, for I went to the king in the 32nd year of King Ar·ta·xerxʹes of Babylon; and sometime later I asked the king for a leave of absence. 7 Then I came to Jerusalem and noticed the terrible thing that E·liʹa·shib had done in behalf of To·biʹah, making a storeroom available for him in the courtyard of the house of the true God. 8 This was very displeasing to me, so I threw all of To·biʹah’s household furniture out of the storeroom. 9 After that I gave orders, and they cleansed the storerooms; and I put back there the utensils of the house of the true God, with the grain offering and the frankincense.10 I also found out that the portions of the Levites had not been given them, so that the Levites and the singers who did the work had gone off, each to his own field. 11 So I reprimanded the deputy rulers and said: “Why has the house of the true God been neglected?” Then I gathered them together and assigned them back to their posts. 12 And all Judah brought in the tenth of the grain, the new wine, and the oil to the storerooms. 13 Then I put Shel·e·miʹah the priest, Zaʹdok the copyist, and Pe·daiʹah of the Levites in charge of the storerooms, and Haʹnan the son of Zacʹcur the son of Mat·ta·niʹah was their assistant, for these men were considered reliable. It was their responsibility to make the distribution to their brothers.14 Do remember me, O my God, concerning this, and do not wipe out my acts of loyal love that I have done for the house of my God and its services.15 In those days I saw people in Judah treading winepresses on the Sabbath, bringing in heaps of grain and loading them on donkeys, and bringing wine, grapes, figs, and every sort of load into Jerusalem on the Sabbath day. So I warned them against selling provisions on that day. 16 And the Tyrʹi·ans who lived in the city were bringing in fish and all kinds of merchandise, selling them to the people of Judah and in Jerusalem on the Sabbath. 17 So I reprimanded the nobles of Judah and said to them: “What is this evil thing that you are doing, even profaning the Sabbath day? 18 Was not this what your forefathers did, so that our God brought all this disaster on us and also on this city? Now you are adding to the burning anger against Israel by profaning the Sabbath.”19 So as soon as the shadows began to fall on the gates of Jerusalem before the Sabbath, I ordered that the doors be closed. I also said that they should not open them until after the Sabbath, and I stationed some of my own attendants at the gates so that no loads would be brought in on the Sabbath day. 20 So the traders and the sellers of all kinds of merchandise spent the night outside Jerusalem once or twice. 21 Then I warned them and said to them: “Why are you spending the night in front of the wall? If you do it again, I will use force against you.” From that time on they did not come on the Sabbath.22 And I told the Levites that they should regularly purify themselves and come and guard the gates to keep the Sabbath day holy. This, also, do remember to my credit, O my God, and show me pity according to your abundant loyal love.23 In those days I also saw Jews who had married Ashʹdod·ite, Amʹmon·ite, and Moʹab·ite women. 24 Half of their sons were speaking Ashʹdod·ite and the language of the different peoples, but none of them knew how to speak the language of the Jews. 25 So I reprimanded them and called down a curse on them and struck some of the men and pulled out their hair and made them swear by God: “You should not give your daughters to their sons, and you should not accept any of their daughters for your sons or yourselves. 26 Was it not because of these that King Solʹo·mon of Israel sinned? Among the many nations there was no king like him; and he was loved by his God, so that God made him king over all Israel. But the foreign wives caused even him to sin. 27 Is it not something unheard of for you to commit this great evil in acting unfaithfully against our God by marrying foreign women?”28 One of the sons of Joiʹa·da the son of E·liʹa·shib the high priest had become a son-in-law of San·balʹlat the Horʹo·nite. So I drove him away from me.29 Do remember them, O my God, because they have defiled the priesthood and the covenant of the priesthood and the Levites.30 And I purified them from every foreign defilement, and I assigned duties to the priests and to the Levites, each to his own service, 31 and arranged for the supply of the wood at appointed times and for the first ripe fruits.Do remember me favorably, O my God.
2 In the month of Niʹsan, in the 20th year of King Ar·ta·xerxʹes, wine was set before him, and as usual I took up the wine and gave it to the king. But I had never been gloomy in his presence. 2 So the king said to me: “Why do you look so gloomy when you are not sick? This can be nothing but gloominess of heart.” At this I became very frightened.3 Then I said to the king: “Long live the king! Why should I not look gloomy when the city, the place where my forefathers are buried, lies in ruins, and its gates have been consumed by fire?” 4 The king then said to me: “What is it that you are seeking?” At once I prayed to the God of the heavens. 5 I then said to the king: “If it pleases the king and if your servant has found favor with you, send me to Judah, to the city where my forefathers are buried, so that I may rebuild it.” 6 Then the king, with his royal consort sitting beside him, said to me: “How long will your journey be, and when will you return?” So it pleased the king to send me, and I gave him a set time.7 Then I said to the king: “If it pleases the king, let letters be given me for the governors of the region Beyond the River, granting me safe passage until I reach Judah, 8 as well as a letter to Aʹsaph the keeper of the Royal Park, so that he may give me timber for beams for the gates of the Fortress of the House and for the walls of the city and for the house where I will go.” So the king gave them to me, for the good hand of my God was upon me.9 Eventually I came to the governors of the region Beyond the River and gave them the king’s letters. The king also sent with me army chiefs and horsemen. 10 When San·balʹlat the Horʹo·nite and To·biʹah the Amʹmon·ite official heard about it, they were very displeased that someone had come to do something good for the people of Israel.11 At length I came to Jerusalem, and I stayed there for three days. 12 I rose up by night, I and a few men with me, and I did not tell anyone what my God had put into my heart to do for Jerusalem, and there was no animal with me except the one I was riding. 13 And I went out at night through the Valley Gate, passing in front of the Fountain of the Big Snake to the Gate of the Ash Heaps, and I inspected the walls of Jerusalem that were broken down and its gates that had been consumed by fire. 14 And I passed along to the Fountain Gate and to the King’s Pool, and there was not enough space for the animal I was riding to pass. 15 But I continued up the valley by night, and I kept inspecting the wall, after which I came back and entered through the Valley Gate, and then I returned.16 The deputy rulers did not know where I had gone and what I was doing, for I had not yet said anything to the Jews, the priests, the nobles, the deputy rulers, and the rest of the workers. 17 Finally I said to them: “You can see what a terrible situation we are in, how Jerusalem lies in ruins and its gates have been burned with fire. Come, let us rebuild the walls of Jerusalem, so that this disgrace will not continue.” 18 Then I told them of how the good hand of my God was upon me and also of the words that the king had spoken to me. At this they said: “Let us get up and build.” So they strengthened themselves for the good work.19 Now when San·balʹlat the Horʹo·nite, To·biʹah the Amʹmon·ite official, and Geʹshem the Arabian heard of it, they began to mock us and show us their contempt and say: “What are you doing? Are you rebelling against the king?” 20 However, I replied: “The God of the heavens is the One who will grant us success, and we his servants will get up and build; but you have neither share nor claim nor memorial in Jerusalem.”
3 E·liʹa·shib the high priest and his brothers the priests got up to build the Sheep Gate. They sanctified it and set up its doors; they sanctified it as far as the Tower of Meʹah, as far as the Tower of Ha·nanʹel. 2 And next to them the men of Jerʹi·cho were building; and next to them Zacʹcur the son of Imʹri was building.3 The sons of Has·se·naʹah built the Fish Gate; they timbered it and then set up its doors, its bolts, and its bars. 4 And next to them Merʹe·moth the son of U·riʹjah the son of Hakʹkoz did repair work, and next to them Me·shulʹlam the son of Ber·e·chiʹah the son of Me·shezʹa·bel did repair work, and next to them Zaʹdok the son of Baʹa·na did repair work. 5 And next to them the Te·koʹites did repair work, but their prominent men would not lower themselves to share in the service of their masters.6 Joiʹa·da the son of Pa·seʹah and Me·shulʹlam the son of Bes·o·deiʹah repaired the Gate of the Old City; they timbered it and then set up its doors, its bolts, and its bars. 7 Next to them Mel·a·tiʹah the Gibʹe·on·ite and Jaʹdon the Me·ronʹo·thite did repair work, men of Gibʹe·on and Mizʹpah who were under the authority of the governor of the region Beyond the River. 8 Next to them Uzʹzi·el the son of Har·haiʹah, one of the goldsmiths, did repair work, and next to him Han·a·niʹah, one of the ointment mixers, did repair work; and they paved Jerusalem as far as the Broad Wall. 9 And next to them Re·phaʹiah the son of Hur, a prince of half the district of Jerusalem, did repair work. 10 And next to them Je·daʹiah the son of Ha·ruʹmaph did repair work in front of his own house, and next to him Hatʹtush the son of Hash·ab·neiʹah did repair work.11 Mal·chiʹjah the son of Haʹrim and Hasʹshub the son of Paʹhath-moʹab repaired another section, as well as the Tower of the Ovens. 12 And next to them Shalʹlum the son of Hal·loʹhesh, a prince of half the district of Jerusalem, did repair work, along with his daughters.13 Haʹnun and the inhabitants of Za·noʹah repaired the Valley Gate; they built it and then set up its doors, its bolts, and its bars, and they repaired 1,000 cubits of the wall as far as the Gate of the Ash Heaps. 14 Mal·chiʹjah the son of Reʹchab, a prince of the district of Beth-hac·cheʹrem, repaired the Gate of the Ash Heaps; he built it and set up its doors, its bolts, and its bars.15 Shalʹlun the son of Col·hoʹzeh, a prince of the district of Mizʹpah, repaired the Fountain Gate; he built it and its roof, set up its doors, its bolts, and its bars, and also repaired the wall of the Pool of the Canal to the King’s Garden and as far as the Stairway that goes down from the City of David.16 After him Ne·he·miʹah the son of Azʹbuk, a prince of half the district of Beth-zur, did repair work from in front of the Burial Places of David as far as the pool that had been built and as far as the House of the Mighty Ones.17 After him the Levites did repair work: Reʹhum the son of Baʹni; and next to him Hash·a·biʹah, a prince of half the district of Keiʹlah, did repair work for his district. 18 After him their brothers did repair work: Bavʹvai the son of Henʹa·dad, a prince of half the district of Keiʹlah.19 And next to him Eʹzer the son of Jeshʹu·a, a prince of Mizʹpah, was repairing another section in front of the ascent to the Armory at the Buttress.20 After him Barʹuch the son of Zabʹbai worked with fervor and repaired another section, from the Buttress as far as the entrance of the house of E·liʹa·shib the high priest.21 After him Merʹe·moth the son of U·riʹjah the son of Hakʹkoz repaired another section, from the entrance of the house of E·liʹa·shib as far as the end of E·liʹa·shib’s house.22 And after him the priests, men of the district of the Jordan, did repair work. 23 After them Benjamin and Hasʹshub did repair work in front of their own house. After them Az·a·riʹah the son of Ma·a·seiʹah the son of A·na·niʹah did repair work near his own house. 24 After him Binʹnu·i the son of Henʹa·dad repaired another section, from the house of Az·a·riʹah as far as the Buttress and as far as the corner.25 After him Paʹlal the son of Uʹzai did repair work in front of the Buttress and the tower that goes out from the King’s House, the upper one that belongs to the Courtyard of the Guard. After him there was Pe·daiʹah the son of Paʹrosh.26 And the temple servants who lived in Oʹphel did repair work as far as in front of the Water Gate on the east and the protruding tower.27 After them the Te·koʹites repaired another section, from in front of the great protruding tower as far as the wall of Oʹphel.28 The priests did repair work above the Horse Gate, each in front of his own house.29 After them Zaʹdok the son of Imʹmer did repair work in front of his own house.And after him She·maiʹah the son of Shec·a·niʹah, the keeper of the East Gate, did repair work.30 After him Han·a·niʹah the son of Shel·e·miʹah and Haʹnun the sixth son of Zaʹlaph repaired another section.After him Me·shulʹlam the son of Ber·e·chiʹah did repair work in front of his own hall.31 After him Mal·chiʹjah, a member of the goldsmith guild, did repair work as far as the house of the temple servants and the traders, in front of the Inspection Gate and as far as the roof chamber of the corner.32 And between the roof chamber of the corner and the Sheep Gate, the goldsmiths and the traders did repair work.
4 Now as soon as San·balʹlat heard that we were rebuilding the wall, he became angry and very upset, and he kept mocking the Jews. 2 And in the presence of his brothers and the army of Sa·marʹi·a, he said: “What are the feeble Jews doing? Will they do this by themselves? Will they offer sacrifices? Will they finish up in a day? Will they bring the charred stones to life out of the heaps of dusty rubble?”3 Now To·biʹah the Amʹmon·ite, who was standing beside him, said: “If even a fox would climb up on what they are building, it would knock down their stone wall.”4 Hear, O our God, for we are being treated with contempt, and make their reproach return on their own heads, and give them over as plunder in a land of captivity. 5 And do not cover over their guilt or let their sin be erased from before you, for they have insulted the builders.6 So we kept building the wall, and the entire wall was joined together and rebuilt up to half its height, and the people continued to put their heart into the work.7 Now as soon as San·balʹlat, To·biʹah, the Arabians, the Amʹmon·ites, and the Ashʹdod·ites heard that the repairing of the walls of Jerusalem was progressing and that the gaps were being filled in, they became very angry. 8 They conspired together to come and fight against Jerusalem and to create a disturbance in it. 9 But we prayed to our God and kept a guard posted against them day and night.10 However, people of Judah were saying: “The strength of the laborers has failed, and there is so much rubble; we will never be able to build the wall.”11 And our enemies kept saying: “Before they know it or see us, we will come right in among them and kill them and stop the work.”12 Whenever the Jews living near them came in, they told us again and again: “They will come at us from all directions.”13 So I kept men posted at the lowest parts of the space behind the wall at the exposed places, and I posted them by families with their swords, their lances, and their bows. 14 When I saw their fear, I immediately rose and said to the nobles and the deputy rulers and the rest of the people: “Do not be afraid of them. Remember Jehovah, who is great and awe-inspiring; and fight for your brothers, your sons and daughters, your wives and homes.”15 Now after our enemies heard that what they were doing had become known to us and that the true God had frustrated their plan, we all went back to work on the wall. 16 From that day forward, half of my men would do the work and half of them would hold the lances, the shields, the bows, and the coats of mail. And the princes stood behind the whole house of Judah 17 who were building the wall. Those who were carrying the loads did the work with one hand while holding a weapon in the other hand. 18 And each of the builders had a sword strapped to his hip while building, and the one to blow the horn stood beside me.19 I then said to the nobles and the deputy rulers and the rest of the people: “The work is large and extensive, and we are spread out on the wall far apart from one another. 20 When you hear the sound of the horn, gather together to where we are. Our God will fight for us.”21 So we kept working while the other half were holding the lances, from the break of dawn until the stars came out. 22 At that time I said to the people: “Let the men, each along with his attendant, spend the night inside Jerusalem, and they will guard us by night and work during the day.” 23 So neither I nor my brothers, my attendants, and the guards who followed me ever took off our garments, and each of us kept his weapon in his right hand.
5 However, there was a great outcry from the people and their wives against their Jewish brothers. 2 Some were saying: “We are many with our sons and our daughters. We must get grain in order to eat and stay alive.” 3 Others were saying: “We are giving our fields and our vineyards and our houses as security to get grain during the food shortage.” 4 Still others were saying: “We have borrowed money on our fields and our vineyards for the king’s tribute. 5 Now we are of the same flesh and blood as our brothers, and our children are just like their children; yet we have to subject our sons and daughters to slavery, and some of our daughters are already in slavery. But we are powerless to stop this, because our fields and our vineyards belong to others.”6 I became very angry when I heard their outcry and these words. 7 So I considered these things in my heart, and I took issue with the nobles and the deputy rulers and said to them: “Each one of you is demanding interest from your own brother.”Further, I arranged for a great assembly because of them. 8 And I said to them: “To the extent possible, we have bought back our own Jewish brothers who were sold to the nations; but will you now sell your own brothers, and are they to be sold back to us?” At this they became speechless, and they could find nothing to say. 9 Then I said: “What you are doing is not good. Should you not walk in the fear of our God so that the nations, our enemies, cannot reproach us? 10 Moreover, I, my brothers, and my attendants are lending them money and grain. Let us, please, stop this lending on interest. 11 Please, restore to them on this very day their fields, their vineyards, their olive groves, and their houses, as well as the hundredth of the money, the grain, the new wine, and the oil that you are demanding as interest from them.”12 To this they said: “We will restore these things to them and ask nothing back. We will do precisely as you say.” So I called the priests and made those men swear to keep this promise. 13 Also, I shook out the folds of my garment and said: “In this manner may the true God shake out from his house and from his possessions every man who does not carry out this promise, and in this manner may he be shaken out and emptied.” To this all the congregation said: “Amen!” And they praised Jehovah, and the people did as they promised.14 Moreover, from the day that he commissioned me to become their governor in the land of Judah, from the 20th year to the 32nd year of King Ar·ta·xerxʹes, 12 years, neither I nor my brothers ate the food allowance due the governor. 15 But the former governors who were before me had burdened the people and had been taking from them 40 silver shekels for bread and wine each day. Also, their attendants had oppressed the people. But I did not do that because of the fear of God.16 Furthermore, I took a hand in the work on this wall, and not a field did we acquire; all my attendants were gathered there for the work. 17 There were 150 Jews and deputy rulers dining at my table, as well as those who came to us from the nations. 18 Every day one bull, six choice sheep, and birds were prepared for me, and once every ten days we had all sorts of wine in abundance. Despite all this I did not demand the food allowance due the governor, because the people were already bearing their burden of service. 19 Do remember me favorably, O my God, for all that I have done in behalf of this people.
6 Now as soon as San·balʹlat, To·biʹah, Geʹshem the Arabian, and the rest of our enemies were told that I had rebuilt the wall and that there were no gaps left in it (although up to that time I had not set up the doors in the gates), 2 San·balʹlat and Geʹshem immediately sent this message to me: “Come, and let us set a time to meet together in the villages of the Valley Plain of Oʹno.” But they were scheming to harm me. 3 So I sent messengers to them, saying: “I am engaged in a great work, and I am not able to go down. Why should the work stop while I leave it to come to you?” 4 They sent me the same message four times, and I gave them the same reply each time.5 Then San·balʹlat sent his attendant to me with the same message a fifth time, with an open letter in his hand. 6 There it was written: “Among the nations it has been heard, and Geʹshem is also saying it, that you and the Jews are scheming to rebel. That is why you are building the wall; and according to these reports you are to become their king. 7 Also, you have appointed prophets to proclaim about you throughout Jerusalem, ‘There is a king in Judah!’ And now these things will be told to the king. So come, and let us discuss this together.”8 However, I sent him this reply: “None of the things you are saying have taken place; you are making them up out of your own imagination.” 9 For they were all trying to frighten us, saying: “Their hands will slacken in the work, and it will not be done.” Now, I pray, strengthen my hands.10 Then I went to the house of She·maiʹah the son of De·laʹiah the son of Me·hetʹa·bel while he was confined there. He said: “Let us set a time to meet at the house of the true God, within the temple, and let us close the doors of the temple, for they are coming to kill you. They are coming to kill you by night.” 11 But I said: “Should a man like me run away? Can a man like me go into the temple and live? I will not go in!” 12 Then I realized that God had not sent him, but that To·biʹah and San·balʹlat had hired him to speak this prophecy against me. 13 He had been hired to frighten me and to cause me to sin, so that they would have grounds to damage my reputation in order to reproach me.14 Do remember, O my God, To·biʹah and San·balʹlat and these deeds, and also No·a·diʹah the prophetess and the rest of the prophets who were constantly trying to frighten me.15 So the wall was completed on the 25th day of Eʹlul, in 52 days.16 As soon as all our enemies heard of it and all the surrounding nations saw it, they became greatly ashamed, and they realized that it was with our God’s help that this work had been done. 17 In those days the nobles of Judah were sending many letters to To·biʹah, and To·biʹah would reply to them. 18 Many in Judah swore allegiance to him, for he was a son-in-law of Shec·a·niʹah the son of Aʹrah, and his son Je·ho·haʹnan had married the daughter of Me·shulʹlam the son of Ber·e·chiʹah. 19 Also, they would constantly tell me good things about him and then report to him what I said. Then To·biʹah would send letters to frighten me.
7 As soon as the wall had been rebuilt I set up the doors; then the gatekeepers, the singers, and the Levites were appointed. 2 I then put my brother Ha·naʹni in charge of Jerusalem, along with Han·a·niʹah the chief of the Fortress, for he was a most trustworthy man and feared the true God more than many others. 3 So I said to them: “The gates of Jerusalem should not be opened until the heat of the day, and while they are standing guard, they should shut the doors and bolt them. And assign the inhabitants of Jerusalem as guards, each to his assigned guardpost and each in front of his own house.” 4 Now the city was spacious and large, and there were few people inside it, and the houses had not been rebuilt.5 But my God put it into my heart to gather together the nobles and the deputy rulers and the people to be enrolled genealogically. Then I found the book of genealogical enrollment of those who first came up, and I found written in it:6 And these were the people of the province who came up out of the captivity of the exiles, those whom King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon had exiled and who later returned to Jerusalem and Judah, each to his own city, 7 those who came with Ze·rubʹba·bel, Jeshʹu·a, Ne·he·miʹah, Az·a·riʹah, Ra·a·miʹah, Na·hamʹa·ni, Morʹde·cai, Bilʹshan, Misʹpe·reth, Bigʹvai, Neʹhum, and Baʹa·nah.The number of the Israelite men included: 8 the sons of Paʹrosh, 2,172; 9 the sons of Sheph·a·tiʹah, 372; 10 the sons of Aʹrah, 652; 11 the sons of Paʹhath-moʹab, of the sons of Jeshʹu·a and Joʹab, 2,818; 12 the sons of Eʹlam, 1,254; 13 the sons of Zatʹtu, 845; 14 the sons of Zacʹcai, 760; 15 the sons of Binʹnu·i, 648; 16 the sons of Beʹbai, 628; 17 the sons of Azʹgad, 2,322; 18 the sons of Ad·o·niʹkam, 667; 19 the sons of Bigʹvai, 2,067; 20 the sons of Aʹdin, 655; 21 the sons of Aʹter, of Hez·e·kiʹah, 98; 22 the sons of Haʹshum, 328; 23 the sons of Beʹzai, 324; 24 the sons of Haʹriph, 112; 25 the sons of Gibʹe·on, 95; 26 the men of Bethʹle·hem and Ne·toʹphah, 188; 27 the men of Anʹa·thoth, 128; 28 the men of Beth-azʹma·veth, 42; 29 the men of Kirʹi·ath-jeʹa·rim, Che·phiʹrah, and Be·erʹoth, 743; 30 the men of Raʹmah and Geʹba, 621; 31 the men of Michʹmas, 122; 32 the men of Bethʹel and Aʹi, 123; 33 the men of the other Neʹbo, 52; 34 the sons of the other Eʹlam, 1,254; 35 the sons of Haʹrim, 320; 36 the sons of Jerʹi·cho, 345; 37 the sons of Lod, Haʹdid, and Oʹno, 721; 38 the sons of Se·naʹah, 3,930.39 The priests: the sons of Je·daʹiah of the house of Jeshʹu·a, 973; 40 the sons of Imʹmer, 1,052; 41 the sons of Pashʹhur, 1,247; 42 the sons of Haʹrim, 1,017.43 The Levites: the sons of Jeshʹu·a, of Kadʹmi·el, of the sons of Hoʹde·vah, 74. 44 The singers: the sons of Aʹsaph, 148. 45 The gatekeepers: the sons of Shalʹlum, the sons of Aʹter, the sons of Talʹmon, the sons of Akʹkub, the sons of Ha·tiʹta, the sons of Shoʹbai, 138.46 The temple servants: the sons of Ziʹha, the sons of Ha·suʹpha, the sons of Tab·baʹoth, 47 the sons of Keʹros, the sons of Siʹa, the sons of Paʹdon, 48 the sons of Le·baʹnah, the sons of Hagʹa·bah, the sons of Salʹmai, 49 the sons of Haʹnan, the sons of Gidʹdel, the sons of Gaʹhar, 50 the sons of Re·aʹiah, the sons of Reʹzin, the sons of Ne·koʹda, 51 the sons of Gazʹzam, the sons of Uzʹza, the sons of Pa·seʹah, 52 the sons of Beʹsai, the sons of Me·uʹnim, the sons of Ne·phushʹe·sim, 53 the sons of Bakʹbuk, the sons of Ha·kuʹpha, the sons of Harʹhur, 54 the sons of Bazʹlith, the sons of Me·hiʹda, the sons of Harʹsha, 55 the sons of Barʹkos, the sons of Sisʹe·ra, the sons of Teʹmah, 56 the sons of Ne·ziʹah, the sons of Ha·tiʹpha.57 The sons of the servants of Solʹo·mon: the sons of Soʹtai, the sons of So·pheʹreth, the sons of Pe·riʹda, 58 the sons of Jaʹa·la, the sons of Darʹkon, the sons of Gidʹdel, 59 the sons of Sheph·a·tiʹah, the sons of Hatʹtil, the sons of Poʹche·reth-haz·ze·baʹim, the sons of Aʹmon. 60 All the temple servants and the sons of the servants of Solʹo·mon were 392.61 And these went up from Tel-meʹlah, Tel-harʹsha, Cheʹrub, Adʹdon, and Imʹmer, but they were unable to verify their paternal house and their origin, as to whether they were Israelites: 62 the sons of De·laʹiah, the sons of To·biʹah, the sons of Ne·koʹda, 642. 63 And of the priests: the sons of Ha·baiʹah, the sons of Hakʹkoz, the sons of Bar·zilʹlai, who took a wife from the daughters of Bar·zilʹlai the Gilʹe·ad·ite and was called by their name. 64 These looked for their records to establish their genealogy, but they could not be found, so they were disqualified from the priesthood. 65 The governor told them that they should not eat from the most holy things until there was a priest who could consult the Uʹrim and Thumʹmim.66 The total number of the entire congregation was 42,360, 67 apart from their male and female slaves, who were 7,337; they also had 245 male and female singers. 68 Their horses were 736, their mules 245, 69 their camels 435, their donkeys 6,720.70 Some of the heads of the paternal houses contributed to the work. The governor gave to the treasury 1,000 gold drachmas, 50 bowls, and 530 priests’ robes. 71 And some of the heads of the paternal houses gave to the project treasury 20,000 gold drachmas and 2,200 silver miʹnas. 72 And the rest of the people gave 20,000 gold drachmas, 2,000 silver miʹnas, and 67 priests’ robes.73 And the priests, the Levites, the gatekeepers, the singers, some of the people, the temple servants, and all the rest of Israel settled in their cities. When the seventh month arrived, the Israelites had settled in their cities.
8 All the people then gathered with one accord at the public square in front of the Water Gate, and they told Ezʹra the copyist to bring the book of the Law of Moses, which Jehovah had commanded Israel. 2 So Ezʹra the priest brought the Law before the congregation of men, women, and all who could listen with understanding, on the first day of the seventh month. 3 And he read aloud from it before the public square in front of the Water Gate, from daybreak until midday, to the men, the women, and all who could understand; and the people listened attentively to the book of the Law. 4 And Ezʹra the copyist was standing on a wooden podium made for the occasion; and standing alongside him on his right were Mat·ti·thiʹah, Sheʹma, A·naiʹah, U·riʹah, Hil·kiʹah, and Ma·a·seiʹah; and on his left were Pe·daiʹah, Mishʹa·el, Mal·chiʹjah, Haʹshum, Hash-badʹda·nah, Zech·a·riʹah, and Me·shulʹlam.5 Ezʹra opened the book in the sight of all the people, for he was above all the people. As he opened it, all the people stood up. 6 Then Ezʹra praised Jehovah the true God, the great One, at which all the people answered, “Amen! Amen!” and lifted up their hands. They then bowed low and prostrated themselves to Jehovah with their faces to the ground. 7 And Jeshʹu·a, Baʹni, She·re·biʹah, Jaʹmin, Akʹkub, Shabʹbe·thai, Ho·diʹah, Ma·a·seiʹah, Ke·liʹta, Az·a·riʹah, Joʹza·bad, Haʹnan, and Pe·laʹiah, who were Levites, were explaining the Law to the people, while the people remained standing. 8 And they continued reading aloud from the book, from the Law of the true God, clearly explaining it and putting meaning into it; so they helped the people to understand what was being read.9 And Ne·he·miʹah, who was then the governor, Ezʹra the priest and copyist, and the Levites who were instructing the people said to all the people: “This day is holy to Jehovah your God. Do not mourn or weep.” For all the people were weeping as they heard the words of the Law. 10 He said to them: “Go, eat the choice things and drink what is sweet, and send portions of food to those who have nothing prepared; for this day is holy to our Lord, and do not feel sad, for the joy of Jehovah is your stronghold.” 11 And the Levites were calming all the people, saying: “Be quiet! for this day is holy, and do not feel sad.” 12 So all the people went away to eat and to drink and to send out portions of food and to carry on a great rejoicing, for they understood the words that had been made known to them.13 And on the second day, the heads of the paternal houses of all the people, the priests, and the Levites gathered around Ezʹra the copyist to gain further insight into the words of the Law. 14 Then they found written in the Law that Jehovah had commanded through Moses that the Israelites should dwell in booths during the festival in the seventh month, 15 and that they should make proclamation and announce throughout all their cities and throughout Jerusalem, saying: “Go out to the mountainous region and bring in leafy branches from olive trees, pine trees, myrtle and palm trees, and the leafy branches of other trees to make booths, according to what is written.”16 So the people went out and brought them in to make booths for themselves, each one on his roof, as well as in their courtyards, in the courtyards of the house of the true God, in the public square of the Water Gate, and in the public square of the Gate of Eʹphra·im. 17 Thus all those of the congregation who had come back from the captivity made booths and were dwelling in the booths, for the Israelites had not done it this way from the days of Joshua the son of Nun until that day, so that there was very great rejoicing. 18 And day by day there was a reading from the book of the Law of the true God, from the first day until the last day. And they held the festival for seven days, and there was a solemn assembly on the eighth day, as was required.
9 On the 24th day of this month the Israelites assembled; they were fasting with sackcloth and dust on themselves. 2 Those of Israelite descent then separated themselves from all the foreigners, and they stood and confessed their own sins and the errors of their fathers. 3 Then they stood up at their place and read aloud from the book of the Law of Jehovah their God for a fourth of the day; and for another fourth of it they were confessing and bowing down to Jehovah their God.4 Jeshʹu·a, Baʹni, Kadʹmi·el, Sheb·a·niʹah, Bunʹni, She·re·biʹah, Baʹni, and Che·naʹni stood on the raised platform of the Levites, and they cried out with a loud voice to Jehovah their God. 5 And the Levites Jeshʹu·a, Kadʹmi·el, Baʹni, Hash·ab·neiʹah, She·re·biʹah, Ho·diʹah, Sheb·a·niʹah, and Peth·a·hiʹah said: “Stand up and praise Jehovah your God throughout all eternity. And let them praise your glorious name, which is exalted above all blessing and praise.6 “You alone are Jehovah; you made the heavens, yes, the heaven of the heavens and all their army, the earth and all that is on it, the seas and all that is in them. And you preserve all of them alive, and the army of the heavens are bowing down to you. 7 You are Jehovah the true God, who chose Aʹbram and brought him out of Ur of the Chal·deʹans and gave him the name Abraham. 8 You found his heart faithful before you, so you made a covenant with him to give him the land of the Caʹnaan·ites, the Hitʹtites, the Amʹor·ites, the Perʹiz·zites, the Jebʹu·sites, and the Girʹga·shites, to give it to his offspring; and you kept your promises, because you are righteous.9 “So you saw the affliction of our forefathers in Egypt, and you heard their outcry at the Red Sea. 10 Then you performed signs and miracles against Pharʹaoh and all his servants and all the people of his land, for you knew that they acted presumptuously against them. You made a name for yourself that remains to this day. 11 And you split the sea before them, so that they crossed through the sea on the dry land, and you hurled their pursuers into the depths like a stone thrown into the turbulent waters. 12 You led them by day with a pillar of cloud, and by night with a pillar of fire, to light up for them the way they should go. 13 And you came down on Mount Siʹnai and spoke with them from heaven and gave them righteous judgments, laws of truth, good regulations and commandments. 14 You made known to them your holy Sabbath, and you gave them commandments, regulations, and a law through your servant Moses. 15 You gave them bread from heaven when they were hungry, and you brought water out of the crag when they were thirsty, and you told them to enter and take possession of the land that you had sworn to give to them.16 “But they, our forefathers, acted presumptuously and became stubborn, and they would not listen to your commandments. 17 They refused to listen, and they did not remember your extraordinary acts that you performed among them, but they became stubborn and appointed a head to return to their slavery in Egypt. But you are a God ready to forgive, compassionate and merciful, slow to anger and abundant in loyal love, and you did not abandon them. 18 Even when they made for themselves a metal statue of a calf and were saying, ‘This is your God who led you up out of Egypt,’ and they committed great acts of disrespect, 19 even then you, in your great mercy, did not abandon them in the wilderness. The pillar of cloud did not depart from over them by day to lead them in the way, nor the pillar of fire by night to light up for them the way they should go. 20 And you gave your good spirit to give them insight, and you did not hold back your manna from their mouth, and you gave them water when they were thirsty. 21 For 40 years you provided them with food in the wilderness. They lacked nothing. Their garments did not wear out, and their feet did not become swollen.22 “You gave them kingdoms and peoples, apportioning them piece by piece, so that they took possession of the land of Siʹhon, that is, the land of the king of Heshʹbon, as well as the land of Og the king of Baʹshan. 23 And you made their sons as numerous as the stars of the heavens. Then you brought them into the land that you had promised their forefathers that they should enter and possess. 24 So their sons went in and took possession of the land, and you subdued before them the Caʹnaan·ites, who were the inhabitants of the land, and you gave them into their hand, both their kings and the peoples of the land, to do with them as they pleased. 25 And they captured fortified cities and a fertile land, and they took possession of houses full of all sorts of good things, cisterns already dug, vineyards, olive groves, and fruit trees in abundance. So they ate and grew satisfied and fat, and they basked in your great goodness.26 “However, they became disobedient and rebelled against you and turned their back on your Law. They killed your prophets who warned them so as to bring them back to you, and they committed acts of great disrespect. 27 For this you gave them into the hand of their adversaries, who kept causing them distress. But they would cry out to you in the time of their distress, and you would hear from the heavens; and because of your great mercy, you would give them saviors to rescue them out of the hand of their adversaries.28 “But as soon as they had relief, they would again do what is bad before you, and you would abandon them to the hand of their enemies, who would dominate them. Then they would return and call to you for help, and you would hear from the heavens and rescue them time and again because of your great mercy. 29 Although you would warn them so as to bring them back to your Law, they behaved presumptuously and refused to listen to your commandments; and they sinned against your regulations, by which a man will live if he observes them. But they stubbornly turned their back and stiffened their neck, and they refused to listen. 30 You extended patience to them for many years and kept warning them by your spirit through your prophets, but they refused to listen. Finally you gave them into the hand of the peoples of the lands. 31 And in your great mercy, you did not exterminate them or abandon them, for you are a compassionate and merciful God.32 “And now, O our God, the God great, mighty, and awe-inspiring, who has kept his covenant and shown loyal love, do not treat lightly all the hardship that has found us, our kings, our princes, our priests, our prophets, our forefathers, and all your people from the days of the kings of As·syrʹi·a down to this day. 33 You have been righteous in all that has come upon us, for you have acted faithfully; but we are the ones who have acted wickedly. 34 As for our kings, our princes, our priests, and our forefathers, they have not observed your Law nor paid attention to your commandments or to your reminders by which you warned them. 35 Even when they were in their kingdom and enjoying the abundant goodness that you gave them and they were in the broad and fertile land that you bestowed on them, they did not serve you and did not turn away from their bad practices. 36 So here we are today, slaves—yes, slaves in the land that you gave to our forefathers to eat its fruitage and its good things. 37 Its abundant produce is for the kings whom you have put over us because of our sins. They rule over our bodies and over our livestock as they see fit, and we are in great distress.38 “So in view of all this, we are making a binding agreement in writing, and it is attested by the seal of our princes, our Levites, and our priests.”
1 The words of Ne·he·miʹah the son of Hac·a·liʹah: Now in the month of Chisʹlev, in the 20th year, I was in Shuʹshan the citadel. 2 At that time Ha·naʹni, one of my brothers, arrived with other men from Judah, and I asked them about the remaining Jews who had escaped the captivity, and also about Jerusalem. 3 They replied: “Those remaining there in the province who have survived the captivity are in a terrible situation and in disgrace. The walls of Jerusalem are broken down, and its gates have been burned with fire.”4 As soon as I heard these words, I sat down and began to weep and mourn for days, and I kept fasting and praying before the God of the heavens. 5 I said: “O Jehovah, the God of the heavens, the great and awe-inspiring God who keeps his covenant and shows loyal love to those who love him and keep his commandments, 6 please, let your ear be attentive and your eyes open to listen to the prayer of your servant that I am praying to you today, day and night, concerning your servants the Israelites, all the while confessing the sins that the people of Israel have committed against you. We have sinned, both I and the house of my father. 7 We have certainly acted corruptly against you by not keeping the commandments, regulations, and judicial decisions that you gave to your servant Moses.8 “Remember, please, the word that you commanded your servant Moses: ‘If you act unfaithfully, I will scatter you among the peoples. 9 But if you return to me and observe my commandments and obey them, though your dispersed people should be at the end of the heavens, I will gather them from there and bring them to the place that I have chosen to have my name reside.’ 10 They are your servants and your people, whom you redeemed by your great power and by your mighty hand. 11 O Jehovah, please, let your ear be attentive to the prayer of your servant and to the prayer of your servants who take delight in fearing your name, and please, grant success to your servant today, and may this man show me compassion.”Now I was cupbearer to the king.
10 King A·has·u·eʹrus imposed forced labor on the land and the islands of the sea.2 And all his powerful and mighty accomplishments, as well as the detailed account of Morʹde·cai’s greatness to which the king exalted him, are they not written in the book of the history of the times of the kings of Meʹdi·a and Persia? 3 For Morʹde·cai the Jew was second only to King A·has·u·eʹrus. He was great among the Jews and respected by the multitude of his brothers, working for the good of his people and advocating the welfare of all their descendants.
2 After these things, when the rage of King A·has·u·eʹrus had subsided, he remembered what Vashʹti had done and what had been decided against her. 2 Then the king’s personal attendants said: “A search should be made for young, beautiful virgins for the king. 3 And let the king appoint commissioners in all the provinces of his realm to bring together all the beautiful young virgins to Shuʹshan the citadel, to the house of the women. Let them be put in the care of Hegʹa·i the king’s eunuch and guardian of the women, and let them be given beauty treatments. 4 And the young woman who is most pleasing to the king will be queen instead of Vashʹti.” The suggestion was pleasing to the king, and that is what he did.5 There was a certain Jewish man in Shuʹshan the citadel whose name was Morʹde·cai son of Jaʹir son of Shimʹe·i son of Kish, a Benʹja·min·ite, 6 who had been taken into exile from Jerusalem with the people who were deported with King Jec·o·niʹah of Judah, whom King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon took into exile. 7 He was the guardian of Ha·dasʹsah, that is, Esther, the daughter of his father’s brother, for she had neither father nor mother. The young woman was beautifully formed and attractive in appearance, and at the death of her father and her mother, Morʹde·cai took her as his daughter. 8 When the king’s word and his law were proclaimed and when many young women were brought together at Shuʹshan the citadel under the care of Hegʹa·i, Esther was also taken to the king’s house under the care of Hegʹa·i the guardian of the women.9 Now the young woman was pleasing to him and won his favor, so he promptly arranged for her beauty treatments and her diet, and he assigned to her seven selected young women from the king’s house. He also transferred her and her young attendants to the best place in the house of the women. 10 Esther did not say anything about her people or her relatives, for Morʹde·cai had instructed her not to tell anyone. 11 Day after day Morʹde·cai would walk in front of the courtyard of the house of the women to learn about Esther’s welfare and about what was happening to her.12 Each young woman had her turn to go in to King A·has·u·eʹrus after completing the 12-month treatment that was prescribed for the women, for this was the way they had to fulfill their beauty treatment—six months with oil of myrrh and six months with balsam oil and various ointments for beauty treatment. 13 Then the young woman was ready to go in to the king, and whatever she asked for would be given her when she went from the house of the women to the king’s house. 14 In the evening she would go in, and in the morning she would return to the second house of the women, under the care of Sha·ashʹgaz the king’s eunuch, the guardian of the concubines. She would not go to the king again unless the king had been especially pleased with her and she was requested by name.15 And when the turn came for Esther the daughter of Abʹi·ha·il the uncle of Morʹde·cai, who had taken her as his daughter, to go in to the king, she did not request anything except what Hegʹa·i the king’s eunuch, the guardian of the women, recommended. (All the while Esther was winning the favor of everyone who saw her.) 16 Esther was taken to King A·has·u·eʹrus at his royal house in the tenth month, that is, the month of Teʹbeth, in the seventh year of his reign. 17 And the king came to love Esther more than all the other women, and she won his favor and approval more than any of the other virgins. So he put the royal headdress on her head and made her queen instead of Vashʹti. 18 And the king held a great banquet for all his princes and his servants, the banquet of Esther. He then proclaimed an amnesty for the provinces, and he kept giving gifts according to the means of the king.19 Now when virgins were brought together a second time, Morʹde·cai was sitting in the king’s gate. 20 Esther did not say anything about her relatives and her people, just as Morʹde·cai had instructed her; Esther continued to do what Morʹde·cai said, just as when she was under his care.21 In those days while Morʹde·cai was sitting in the king’s gate, Bigʹthan and Teʹresh, two court officials of the king, doorkeepers, got angry and plotted to do away with King A·has·u·eʹrus. 22 But Morʹde·cai learned about it, and he immediately told Queen Esther. Esther then spoke to the king in Morʹde·cai’s name. 23 So the matter was investigated and eventually confirmed, and both men were hanged on a stake; and this was all recorded in the book of the history of the times in the presence of the king.
3 After this King A·has·u·eʹrus promoted Haʹman the son of Ham·me·daʹtha the Agʹag·ite and exalted him by putting his throne above all the other princes who were with him. 2 And all the king’s servants who were in the king’s gate would bow low and prostrate themselves to Haʹman, for this is what the king had commanded respecting him. But Morʹde·cai refused to bow low or prostrate himself. 3 So the king’s servants who were in the king’s gate said to Morʹde·cai: “Why are you ignoring the king’s commandment?” 4 Day after day they would ask him, but he would not listen to them. Then they told Haʹman to see whether Morʹde·cai’s conduct would be tolerated; for he had told them that he was a Jew.5 Now when Haʹman saw that Morʹde·cai refused to bow low and prostrate himself to him, Haʹman became filled with rage. 6 But he despised the thought of doing away with Morʹde·cai alone, for they had told him about Morʹde·cai’s people. So Haʹman began seeking to annihilate all the Jews who were in the entire realm of A·has·u·eʹrus, all of Morʹde·cai’s people.7 In the first month, that is, the month of Niʹsan, in the 12th year of King A·has·u·eʹrus, they cast Pur (that is, the Lot) before Haʹman to determine the day and the month, and it fell on the 12th month, that is, Aʹdar. 8 Haʹman then said to King A·has·u·eʹrus: “There is a certain people scattered and dispersed among the peoples in all the provinces of your realm, whose laws are different from those of all other peoples; and they do not obey the king’s laws, and it is not in the king’s interests to let them be. 9 If it pleases the king, let a decree be written that they be destroyed. I will pay 10,000 silver talents to the officials to put into the royal treasury.”10 At that the king removed his signet ring from his own hand and gave it to Haʹman the son of Ham·me·daʹtha the Agʹag·ite, who was the enemy of the Jews. 11 The king said to Haʹman: “The silver and the people are given to you, to do with them as you see fit.” 12 The king’s secretaries were then called on the 13th day of the first month. They put in writing all of Haʹman’s orders to the king’s satraps, the governors who were over the provinces, and the princes of the different peoples, to each province in its own script and to each people in its own language. It was written in the name of King A·has·u·eʹrus and sealed with the king’s signet ring.13 The letters were sent by means of couriers to all the king’s provinces, giving the order to annihilate, to kill, and to destroy all the Jews, young and old alike, children and women, on a single day, on the 13th day of the 12th month, that is, the month of Aʹdar, and to seize their possessions. 14 A copy of the document was to be issued as a law in every province and proclaimed to all the peoples, so that they would be prepared for that day. 15 The couriers went out quickly by order of the king; the law was issued in Shuʹshan the citadel. The king and Haʹman then sat down to drink, but the city of Shuʹshan was in confusion.
4 When Morʹde·cai learned of everything that had been done, he ripped his garments apart and put on sackcloth and ashes. Then he went out into the middle of the city, crying out loudly and bitterly. 2 He went only as far as the king’s gate, for no one was to enter the king’s gate wearing sackcloth. 3 And in every province where the king’s word and his decree reached, there was great mourning among the Jews, along with fasting and weeping and wailing. Many were lying down in sackcloth and ashes. 4 When Esther’s female attendants and her eunuchs came in and told her, the queen was deeply distressed. Then she sent garments for Morʹde·cai to wear instead of his sackcloth, but he refused them. 5 At this Esther summoned Haʹthach, one of the king’s eunuchs, whom he had appointed to serve her, and she ordered him to find out from Morʹde·cai what this meant and what was happening.6 So Haʹthach went out to Morʹde·cai in the public square of the city in front of the king’s gate. 7 Morʹde·cai told him about everything that had happened to him and the exact amount of money that Haʹman had promised to pay to the king’s treasury for the Jews to be destroyed. 8 He also gave him a copy of the written decree that had been issued in Shuʹshan for their annihilation. He was to show it to Esther and explain it to her and instruct her to go in to the king to beg for his favor and to plead directly with him in behalf of her people.9 Haʹthach came back and told Esther what Morʹde·cai had said. 10 Esther replied to Haʹthach with instructions to tell Morʹde·cai: 11 “All the king’s servants and the people of the king’s provinces are aware that if any man or woman goes into the king’s inner courtyard without being summoned, there is only one law that applies: He is to be put to death; he may live only if the king holds out to him the golden scepter. And I have not been summoned to the king now for 30 days.”12 When Morʹde·cai was told what Esther had said, 13 he replied to Esther: “Do not imagine that because you are in the king’s household you are any more likely to escape than all the other Jews. 14 For if you remain silent at this time, relief and deliverance will come to the Jews from another source, but you and your father’s house will perish. And who knows whether it is for a time like this that you have attained to your royal status?”15 Then Esther replied to Morʹde·cai: 16 “Go, gather all the Jews who are found in Shuʹshan and fast in my behalf. Do not eat or drink for three days, night and day. I along with my female attendants will also fast. I will go in to the king, which is against the law, and if I am to perish, I will perish.” 17 So Morʹde·cai went his way and did all that Esther had instructed him to do.
5 On the third day Esther put on her royal robes and stood in the inner courtyard of the king’s house, opposite the king’s house, while the king was sitting on his royal throne in the royal house opposite the entrance. 2 As soon as the king saw Queen Esther standing in the courtyard, she gained his favor, and the king held out to Esther the golden scepter that was in his hand. Esther then approached and touched the top of the scepter.3 The king asked her: “What is the matter, Queen Esther? What is your request? Even to the half of my kingdom, it will be granted you!” 4 Esther replied: “If it pleases the king, let the king along with Haʹman come today to the banquet that I have prepared for him.” 5 So the king said to his men: “Tell Haʹman to come quickly, as Esther requests.” So the king and Haʹman went to the banquet that Esther had prepared.6 During the banquet of wine, the king said to Esther: “What is your petition? It will be granted you! And what is your request? Even to the half of my kingdom, it will be done!” 7 Esther answered: “My petition and my request is, 8 If I have found favor with the king and if it pleases the king to grant my petition and to act on my request, let the king and Haʹman come to the banquet that I will hold for them tomorrow; and tomorrow I will do as the king says.”9 On that day Haʹman went out joyful and with a cheerful heart. But when Haʹman saw Morʹde·cai in the king’s gate and noticed that he did not rise and tremble in his presence, Haʹman was filled with rage against Morʹde·cai. 10 However, Haʹman restrained himself and went to his house. Then he sent for his friends and Zeʹresh his wife. 11 Haʹman boasted about his glorious wealth, his many sons, and how the king had promoted him and had exalted him over the princes and the servants of the king.12 Haʹman added: “What is more, Queen Esther invited no one else but me to accompany the king to the banquet she prepared. I am also invited tomorrow to be with her and the king. 13 But all of this fails to satisfy me as long as I see Morʹde·cai the Jew sitting in the king’s gate.” 14 So Zeʹresh his wife and all his friends said to him: “Have a stake put up, 50 cubits high. And in the morning tell the king that Morʹde·cai should be hanged on it. Then go with the king to enjoy yourself at the banquet.” This suggestion seemed good to Haʹman, so he had the stake put up.
6 That night the king could not sleep. So he said to bring the book of the historical records of the times, and it was read to the king. 2 There it was found written what Morʹde·cai had reported concerning Big·thaʹna and Teʹresh, two court officials of the king, doorkeepers, who had plotted to do away with King A·has·u·eʹrus. 3 The king asked: “What honor and recognition has been given to Morʹde·cai for this?” To this the king’s personal attendants said: “Nothing has been done for him.”4 Later the king said: “Who is in the courtyard?” Now Haʹman had come into the outer courtyard of the king’s house to speak to the king about having Morʹde·cai hanged on the stake that he had prepared for him. 5 The king’s attendants said to him: “It is Haʹman standing in the courtyard.” So the king said: “Have him come in.”6 When Haʹman came in, the king said to him: “What should be done for the man whom the king wishes to honor?” Haʹman said in his heart: “Whom would the king wish to honor more than me?” 7 So Haʹman said to the king: “For the man whom the king wishes to honor, 8 let them bring royal attire that the king wears and a horse on which the king rides, with the royal headdress on its head. 9 Then let the attire and the horse be put into the charge of one of the king’s noble princes, and they should clothe the man whom the king wishes to honor and have him ride on the horse in the public square of the city. They should call out before him: ‘This is what is done for the man whom the king wishes to honor!’” 10 At once the king said to Haʹman: “Quick! Take the attire and the horse, and do what you just said for Morʹde·cai the Jew who is sitting in the king’s gate. Do not leave out anything that you have said.”11 So Haʹman took the attire and the horse, and he clothed Morʹde·cai and made him ride in the public square of the city and called out before him: “This is what is done for the man whom the king wishes to honor!” 12 Afterward Morʹde·cai returned to the king’s gate, but Haʹman hurried to his house, mourning with his head covered. 13 When Haʹman related to his wife Zeʹresh and to all his friends everything that had happened to him, his wise men and his wife Zeʹresh said to him: “If Morʹde·cai, before whom you have started to fall, is of Jewish descent, you will not prevail against him; you will surely fall before him.”14 While they were still speaking with him, the king’s court officials arrived and quickly took Haʹman to the banquet that Esther had made.
7 So the king and Haʹman came in to Queen Esther’s banquet. 2 The king said to Esther again on the second day during the banquet of wine: “What is your petition, Queen Esther? It will be granted you. And what is your request? Even to the half of my kingdom, it will be done!” 3 Queen Esther answered: “If I have found favor with you, O king, and if it pleases the king, let my life be granted as my petition, and my people as my request. 4 For we have been sold, I and my people, to be annihilated, killed, and destroyed. If we had simply been sold as male and female slaves, I would have kept silent. But the distress is not proper, for it will be damaging to the king.”5 King A·has·u·eʹrus then said to Queen Esther: “Who is this, and where is the man who has dared to do such a thing?” 6 Esther said: “The adversary and enemy is this evil Haʹman.”Haʹman became terrified because of the king and the queen. 7 The king rose up in a rage from the banquet of wine and went into the palace garden, but Haʹman stood up to plead with Queen Esther for his life, for he realized that the king was determined to punish him. 8 The king returned from the palace garden to the house of the wine banquet and saw that Haʹman had thrown himself on the couch where Esther was. The king exclaimed: “Is he also going to rape the queen in my own house?” As soon as these words left the king’s mouth, they covered Haʹman’s face. 9 Har·boʹna, one of the king’s court officials, now said: “Haʹman also prepared a stake for Morʹde·cai, whose report saved the king. It is standing at Haʹman’s house, 50 cubits high.” At that the king said: “Hang him on it.” 10 So they hanged Haʹman on the stake that he had prepared for Morʹde·cai, and the king’s rage subsided.
8 On that day King A·has·u·eʹrus gave the house of Haʹman, the enemy of the Jews, to Queen Esther; and Morʹde·cai came in before the king, because Esther had revealed how he was related to her. 2 Then the king removed his signet ring that he had taken away from Haʹman and gave it to Morʹde·cai. And Esther put Morʹde·cai in charge of the house of Haʹman.3 Moreover, Esther spoke again to the king. She fell down at his feet and wept and pleaded with him to undo the harm done by Haʹman the Agʹag·ite and his scheme against the Jews. 4 The king held the golden scepter out to Esther, at which Esther rose and stood before the king. 5 She said: “If it pleases the king and if I have his favor, and if it seems proper to the king and I am pleasing in his eyes, let an order be written to annul the documents of that schemer Haʹman the son of Ham·me·daʹtha the Agʹag·ite, which he wrote to destroy the Jews in all the king’s provinces. 6 For how can I bear to look upon the disaster that will come upon my people, and how can I bear to see the destruction of my relatives?”7 So King A·has·u·eʹrus said to Queen Esther and to Morʹde·cai the Jew: “Look! I have given the house of Haʹman to Esther and have had him hanged on the stake, because of his plot to attack the Jews. 8 You may now write in the king’s name whatever you see fit in behalf of the Jews and seal it with the king’s signet ring, for a decree that is written in the king’s name and sealed with the king’s signet ring cannot be revoked.”9 So the secretaries of the king were summoned at that time in the third month, that is, the month of Siʹvan, on the 23rd day, and they wrote all that Morʹde·cai commanded to the Jews, as well as to the satraps, the governors, and the princes of the provinces from Inʹdi·a to E·thi·oʹpi·a, 127 provinces, to each province in its own script and to each people in its own language and to the Jews in their own script and language.10 He wrote it in the name of King A·has·u·eʹrus and sealed it with the king’s signet ring and sent the written documents by the hand of couriers on horses; they rode on swift post-horses, bred for royal service. 11 In these documents the king granted permission to the Jews in all the different cities to gather together and defend their lives and to annihilate, kill, and destroy any forces of any people or province that might attack them, including women and children, and to seize their possessions. 12 This was to occur on the same day in all the provinces of King A·has·u·eʹrus, on the 13th day of the 12th month, that is, the month of Aʹdar. 13 The text of the document was to be issued as law throughout all the provinces. It was to be proclaimed to all the peoples, so that the Jews would be ready on that day to take vengeance on their enemies. 14 The couriers riding the post-horses used in the royal service went out urgently and speedily at the king’s order. The law was also issued in Shuʹshan the citadel.15 Now Morʹde·cai left the king’s presence in royal apparel of blue and white, wearing a great golden crown and a fine-fabric cloak of purple wool. And the city of Shuʹshan shouted for joy. 16 For the Jews there was relief and rejoicing and exultation and honor. 17 And in all the provinces and all the cities, wherever the decree of the king and his law reached, the Jews were rejoicing and exulting, holding banquets and celebrations. Many of the peoples of the land were declaring themselves Jews, for the dread of the Jews had fallen upon them.
9 On the 13th day of the 12th month, that is, the month of Aʹdar, when the king’s word and his law were to be carried out, on the day when the enemies of the Jews hoped to overpower them, the opposite happened, and the Jews defeated those who hated them. 2 The Jews gathered together in their cities in all the provinces of King A·has·u·eʹrus to lay hands on those seeking to harm them, and not a man could stand against them, for the dread of them had fallen upon all the peoples. 3 And all the princes of the provinces, the satraps, the governors, and those handling the business of the king were supporting the Jews, for they were in fear of Morʹde·cai. 4 Morʹde·cai had become powerful in the king’s house, and his fame was spreading throughout all the provinces, because Morʹde·cai was steadily growing more powerful.5 The Jews struck down all their enemies with the sword, killing and destroying them; they did whatever they wanted to those hating them. 6 In Shuʹshan the citadel the Jews killed and destroyed 500 men. 7 Also, they killed Par·shan·daʹtha, Dalʹphon, As·paʹtha, 8 Po·raʹtha, A·daʹli·a, A·ri·daʹtha, 9 Par·mashʹta, Arʹi·sai, Arʹi·dai, and Vai·zaʹtha, 10 the ten sons of Haʹman the son of Ham·me·daʹtha, the enemy of the Jews. But after they killed them, they did not seize any plunder.11 On that day the number of those killed in Shuʹshan the citadel was reported to the king.12 The king said to Queen Esther: “In Shuʹshan the citadel the Jews have killed and destroyed 500 men and the ten sons of Haʹman. What, then, have they done in the rest of the king’s provinces? What is your petition now? It will be granted you. And what is your further request? It will be done.” 13 Esther replied: “If it pleases the king, let the Jews who are in Shuʹshan be permitted to act tomorrow also according to today’s law; and let the ten sons of Haʹman be hanged on the stake.” 14 So the king gave orders for that to be done. A law was issued in Shuʹshan, and the ten sons of Haʹman were hanged.15 The Jews in Shuʹshan gathered together again on the 14th day of the month of Aʹdar and killed 300 men in Shuʹshan, but they did not seize any plunder.16 The rest of the Jews in the provinces of the king also gathered together and defended their lives. They got rid of their enemies, killing 75,000 of those who hated them; but they did not seize any plunder. 17 That was on the 13th day of the month of Aʹdar, and they rested on the 14th day and made it a day of feasting and of rejoicing.18 The Jews in Shuʹshan gathered together on the 13th day and on the 14th day, and they rested on the 15th day and made it a day of feasting and rejoicing. 19 That is why the rural Jews inhabiting the cities of the outlying districts made the 14th day of the month of Aʹdar a day of rejoicing and feasting, a day of celebration, and a time to send portions of food to one another.20 Morʹde·cai recorded these events and sent official letters to all the Jews in all the provinces of King A·has·u·eʹrus, both near and far. 21 He instructed them to observe the 14th day of the month of Aʹdar, as well as the 15th day, each and every year, 22 because on those days the Jews rested from their enemies and in that month their grief was changed to rejoicing and their mourning to a day of celebration. They were to observe them as days of feasting and rejoicing and as a time to send portions of food to one another and gifts to the poor.23 And the Jews agreed to continue the celebration that they had started and to do what Morʹde·cai wrote to them. 24 For Haʹman the son of Ham·me·daʹtha the Agʹag·ite, the enemy of all the Jews, had schemed against the Jews to destroy them, and he had cast Pur, that is, the Lot, to throw them into a panic and to destroy them. 25 But when Esther came in before the king, he gave orders in writing: “Let his evil scheme against the Jews come back on his own head”; and they hanged him and his sons on the stake. 26 That is why they called these days Puʹrim, after the name of the Pur. Therefore, because of all that was written in this letter and what they saw concerning this matter and what had come upon them, 27 the Jews obligated themselves and their descendants and all those joining them to celebrate these two days without fail and to carry out what was written concerning them at the appointed time each and every year. 28 These days were to be remembered and observed in every generation, by each family, each province, and each city; and these days of Puʹrim should not cease among the Jews, and their commemoration should not come to an end among their descendants.29 Then Queen Esther, the daughter of Abʹi·ha·il, and Morʹde·cai the Jew wrote with full authority to confirm a second letter about Puʹrim. 30 He sent official letters to all the Jews in the 127 provinces, the realm of A·has·u·eʹrus, in words of peace and truth 31 to confirm the observance of the days of Puʹrim at their appointed times, just as Morʹde·cai the Jew and Queen Esther had instructed them to do and just as they had obligated themselves and their descendants to carry out, including the fasting and supplication. 32 And the command of Esther confirmed these matters concerning Puʹrim, and it was recorded in a book.
1 Now in the days of A·has·u·eʹrus, that is, the A·has·u·eʹrus who ruled over 127 provinces from Inʹdi·a to E·thi·oʹpi·a, 2 in those days when King A·has·u·eʹrus was sitting on his royal throne in Shuʹshan the citadel, 3 in the third year of his reign, he held a banquet for all his princes and his servants. The army of Persia and Meʹdi·a, the nobles, and the princes of the provinces were before him, 4 and he showed them the wealth of his glorious kingdom and the grandeur and the splendor of his magnificence for many days, 180 days. 5 And when these days were completed, the king held a banquet for seven days for all the people present in Shuʹshan the citadel, from the greatest to the least, in the courtyard of the garden of the king’s palace. 6 There were linen, fine cotton, and blue material held fast in ropes of fine fabric, purple wool in silver rings, pillars of marble, and couches of gold and silver on a pavement of porphyry, marble, pearl, and black marble.7 Wine was served in gold cups; each cup was different from the other, and the royal wine was plentiful, according to the means of the king. 8 The drinking was according to the rule that no one was under compulsion, for the king had arranged with the officials of his palace that each should do as he pleased.9 Queen Vashʹti also held a banquet for the women at the royal house of King A·has·u·eʹrus.10 On the seventh day, when the king’s heart was in a cheerful mood because of the wine, he told Me·huʹman, Bizʹtha, Har·boʹna, Bigʹtha, A·bagʹtha, Zeʹthar, and Carʹkas, the seven court officials who were personal attendants to King A·has·u·eʹrus, 11 to bring before the king Queen Vashʹti, wearing the royal headdress, to show the peoples and the princes her beauty, for she was very beautiful. 12 But Queen Vashʹti kept refusing to come at the king’s order that was conveyed through the court officials. At this the king became very angry, and his rage flared up within him.13 The king then spoke to the wise men who had insight with regard to precedents (for in this way the king’s matter came before all those versed in law and legal cases, 14 and those closest to him were Car·sheʹna, Sheʹthar, Ad·maʹtha, Tarʹshish, Meʹres, Mar·seʹna, and Me·muʹcan, seven princes of Persia and Meʹdi·a, who had access to the king and who occupied the highest positions in the kingdom). 15 The king asked: “According to law, what is to be done with Queen Vashʹti because she has not obeyed the order of King A·has·u·eʹrus conveyed through the court officials?”16 To this Me·muʹcan said in the presence of the king and the princes: “It is not against the king alone that Queen Vashʹti has done wrong, but against all the princes and against all the peoples in all the provinces of King A·has·u·eʹrus. 17 For what the queen did will become known by all the wives, and they will despise their husbands and say, ‘King A·has·u·eʹrus said to bring in Queen Vashʹti before him, but she refused to come.’ 18 This very day the princesses of Persia and Meʹdi·a who know about what the queen did will talk to all the princes of the king, resulting in much contempt and indignation. 19 If it seems good to the king, let a royal decree be issued from him, and let it be written among the laws of Persia and Meʹdi·a, which cannot be repealed, that Vashʹti may never again come in before King A·has·u·eʹrus; and let the king confer her royal position on a woman who is better than she is. 20 And when the decree of the king is heard in all his vast realm, all the wives will give honor to their husbands, from the greatest to the least.”21 This proposal pleased the king and the princes, and the king did what Me·muʹcan said. 22 So he sent letters to all the royal provinces, to each province in its own script and to each people in its own language, for every husband to be master in his own house and to speak in the language of his own people.
10 “I loathe my life.I will give vent to my complaints.I will speak out in my bitter distress! 2 I will say to God: ‘Do not pronounce me guilty.Tell me why you are contending with me. 3 Does it benefit you to oppress,To despise the work of your handsWhile you favor the advice of the wicked? 4 Do you have eyes of flesh,Or do you see as mortal man does? 5 Are your days like the days of mortals,Or are your years like those of a man, 6 That you should search out my errorAnd keep looking for my sin? 7 You know that I am not guilty;And no one can save me from your hand. 8 Your own hands have shaped me and made me,But now you would completely destroy me. 9 Remember, please, that you made me out of clay,But now you make me return to dust.10 Did you not pour me out like milkAnd curdle me like cheese?11 With skin and flesh you clothed me,And with bones and sinews you wove me together.12 You have given me life and loyal love;You have guarded my spirit with your care.13 But you secretly intended to do these things.I know that these things are from you.14 If I sinned, you would watch me,And you would not acquit me of my error.15 If I am guilty, too bad for me!And even if I am innocent, I cannot raise my head,For I am filled with dishonor and affliction.16 If I raise my head up, you hunt for me like a lionAnd again show your power against me.17 You bring new witnesses against meAnd increase your anger against me,As hardship after hardship comes upon me.18 So why did you bring me out from the womb?I should have died before any eye could see me.19 It would have been as though I never existed;I would have been taken straight from the womb to the grave.’20 Are not my days few? Let him leave me alone;Let him turn his eyes away from me, so that I may find some relief21 Before I go away—and I will not return—To the land of deepest darkness,22 To the land of utter gloom,A land of deep shadow and disorder,Where even the light is like the gloom.”
11 Zoʹphar the Naʹa·ma·thite said in reply: 2 “Will all these words go unanswered,Or will a lot of talking make someone right? 3 Will your empty talk silence people?Will no one rebuke you for your mocking words? 4 For you say, ‘My teaching is pure,And I am clean in your eyes.’ 5 But if only God would speakAnd open his lips to you! 6 Then he would reveal to you the secrets of wisdom,For practical wisdom has many sides.Then you would realize that God allows some of your error to be forgotten. 7 Can you discover the deep things of GodOr discover everything about the Almighty? 8 It is higher than heaven. What can you accomplish?It is deeper than the Grave. What can you know? 9 It is longer than the earthAnd broader than the sea.10 If he passes by and detains someone and convenes a court,Who can resist him?11 For he knows when men are deceitful.When he sees what is evil, will he not take notice?12 But an empty-headed man will understandOnly when a wild donkey can give birth to a man.13 If only you would prepare your heartAnd stretch out your hands to him.14 If your hand is doing wrong, put it far away,And let no unrighteousness dwell in your tents.15 For then you could lift up your face with no defect;You could stand firm, free of fear.16 For then you will forget your trouble;You will remember it as waters that have flowed past you.17 Your life will become brighter than midday;Even its darkness will be like the morning.18 You will be confident because there is hope,And you will look around and lie down in security.19 You will lie down, with no one to make you afraid,And many people will seek your favor.20 But the eyes of the wicked will fail;And they will find no place to escape,And their only hope will be death.”
12 Then Job said in reply: 2 “Surely you are the people who know,And wisdom will die out with you! 3 But I too have understanding.I am not inferior to you.Who does not know these things? 4 I have become a laughingstock to my companions,One calling to God for an answer.A righteous and blameless man is a laughingstock. 5 The carefree person has contempt for calamity,Thinking it is only for those whose feet are unsteady. 6 The tents of robbers are at peace,And those who provoke God are secure,Those who have their god in their hands. 7 However, ask, please, the animals, and they will instruct you;Also the birds of the heavens, and they will tell you. 8 Or give consideration to the earth, and it will instruct you;And the fish of the sea will declare it to you. 9 Who among all these does not knowThat the hand of Jehovah has done this?10 In his hand is the life of every living thingAnd the spirit of every human.11 Does not the ear test out wordsAs the tongue tastes food?12 Is not wisdom found among the aged,And does not understanding come with a long life?13 With him there are wisdom and mightiness;He has counsel and understanding.14 When he tears something down, it cannot be rebuilt;What he has shut, no man can open.15 When he withholds the waters, everything dries up;When he sends them out, they overwhelm the earth.16 With him there are strength and practical wisdom;To him belong the one going astray and the one leading astray;17 He makes counselors go barefoot,And he makes fools of judges.18 He loosens the bonds imposed by kings,And he binds a belt around their waist.19 He makes priests walk barefoot,And he overthrows those who are firmly established in power;20 He deprives trusted advisers of speechAnd takes away the sensibleness of old men;21 He pours out contempt upon nobles,And he makes powerful ones weak;22 He reveals deep things from the darkness,And he brings deep darkness into the light;23 He makes nations grow great in order to destroy them;He enlarges nations, that he may lead them into exile.24 He takes away the understanding of the leaders of the peopleAnd makes them wander in trackless wastelands.25 They grope in darkness, where there is no light;He makes them wander about like drunken men.
13 “Yes, my eye has seen all of this,My ear has heard and understood it. 2 What you know, I also know;I am not inferior to you. 3 For my part, I would rather speak to the Almighty himself;I desire to argue my case with God. 4 But you are smearing me with lies;All of you are useless physicians. 5 If only you would keep absolutely silent,That would show wisdom on your part. 6 Listen, please, to my arguments,And pay attention to the pleadings of my lips. 7 Will you speak unjustly on God’s behalf,And will you speak deceitfully for him? 8 Will you take his side,Will you try to plead the case of the true God? 9 Would it turn out well if he examined you?Will you fool him as you would a mortal man?10 He will surely rebuke youIf you secretly try to show favoritism.11 Will not his very dignity terrify youAnd the dread of him fall upon you?12 Your wise sayings are proverbs of ashes;Your defenses are as fragile as defenses of clay.13 Keep silent before me, so that I may speak.Then let whatever may come upon me come!14 Why do I put myself in dangerAnd take my life in my hands?15 Though he may slay me, I would still wait;I would argue my case before his face.16 He would then become my salvation,For no godless person may come in before him.17 Listen closely to my word;Pay attention to my declaration.18 See, now, I have prepared my legal case;I know I am in the right.19 Who will contend with me?I would die if I were to stay silent!20 Only grant two things to me, O God,So that I will not conceal myself from before you:21 Remove your heavy hand far away from me,And do not let the fear of you terrify me.22 Either call and I will answer,Or let me speak, and you answer me.23 What are my errors and sins?Reveal to me my transgression and my sin.24 Why do you hide your faceAnd consider me your enemy?25 Will you try to frighten a windblown leafOr chase after dry stubble?26 For you keep recording bitter accusations against me,And you make me answer for the sins of my youth.27 You have put my feet in stocks,You scrutinize all my paths,And you trace out each of my footprints.28 So man decays like something rotten,Like a garment eaten by moths.
14 “Man, born of woman,Is short-lived and filled with trouble. 2 He comes up like a blossom and then withers away;He flees like a shadow and disappears. 3 Yes, you have fixed your eye upon him,And you bring him into judgment with yourself. 4 Who can produce someone clean from someone unclean?No one can! 5 If his days are decided,The number of his months is with you;You have set a limit for him that he may not go beyond. 6 Turn your gaze away from him so that he may rest,Until, like a hired worker, he finishes out his day. 7 For there is hope even for a tree.If it is cut down, it will sprout again,And its twigs will continue to grow. 8 If its root grows old in the groundAnd its stump dies in the soil, 9 At the scent of water it will sprout;And it will produce branches like a new plant.10 But a man dies and lies powerless;When a human expires, where is he?11 Waters disappear from the sea,And a river drains away and dries up.12 Man also lies down and does not get up.Until heaven is no more, they will not wake up,Nor will they be aroused from their sleep.13 O that in the Grave you would conceal me,That you would hide me until your anger passes by,That you would set a time limit for me and remember me!14 If a man dies, can he live again?I will wait all the days of my compulsory serviceUntil my relief comes.15 You will call, and I will answer you.You will long for the work of your hands.16 But for now, you keep counting my every step;You watch only for my sin.17 My transgression is sealed up in a bag,And you seal up my error with glue.18 As a mountain falls and crumbles awayAnd a rock is dislodged from its place,19 As water wears away stonesAnd its torrents wash away earth’s soil,So you have destroyed the hope of mortal man.20 You keep overpowering him until he perishes;You change his appearance, and you send him away.21 His sons are honored, but he does not know it;They become insignificant, but he does not realize it.22 He feels pain only while he is still in his flesh;He mourns only while he is still alive.”
15 Elʹi·phaz the Teʹman·ite said in reply: 2 “Will a wise person answer with empty arguments,Or will he fill his belly with the east wind? 3 Reproving with mere words is useless,And talk alone is of no benefit. 4 For you undermine the fear of God,And you diminish any concern for God. 5 For your error dictates what you say,And you choose crafty speech. 6 Your own mouth condemns you, and not I;Your own lips testify against you. 7 Were you the first man ever born,Or was your birth before that of the hills? 8 Do you listen to the confidential talk of God,Or do you limit wisdom to yourself? 9 What do you know that we do not know?What do you understand that we do not?10 Both the gray-haired and the aged are among us,Men much older than your father.11 Are God’s consolations not enough for you,Or words spoken gently to you?12 Why does your heart carry you away,And why do your eyes flash with anger?13 For you turn your spirit against God himself,And you allow such words to go out of your own mouth.14 What is mortal man that he should be pure,Or anyone born of a woman that he should be righteous?15 Look! He has no faith in his holy ones,And even the heavens are not pure in his eyes.16 How much less so when a person is detestable and corrupt,A man who drinks in unrighteousness just like water!17 I will inform you; listen to me!I will relate what I have seen,18 What wise men have related from their fathers,Things they have not hidden.19 To them alone the land was given,And no stranger passed among them.20 A wicked person suffers torment all his days,Throughout all the years reserved for the tyrant.21 Terrifying sounds are in his ears;In a time of peace, marauders attack him.22 He does not believe that he will escape from darkness;He is reserved for a sword.23 He wanders about in search of food—where is it?He well knows that the day of darkness is at hand.24 Distress and anguish keep terrifying him;They overpower him like a king ready to launch an attack.25 For he raises his hand against God himselfAnd tries to defy the Almighty;26 He stubbornly rushes against Him,With his thick, strong shield;27 His face is covered with fat,And his hips bulge with fat;28 He resides in cities that will be brought to ruin,In houses where no one will dwell,Which will become heaps of stones.29 He will not grow rich, and his wealth will not accumulate,Nor will his possessions spread over the land.30 He will not escape from darkness;A flame will dry up his twig,And he will pass away by a blast of God’s mouth.31 He should not go astray and trust in what is worthless,For what he gets in exchange will be worthless;32 It will happen before his day,And his branches will never flourish.33 He will be like a vine that shakes off its unripe grapes,And like an olive tree that casts off its blossoms.34 For the assembly of godless ones is sterile,And fire will consume the tents of bribery.35 They conceive trouble and give birth to what is wicked,And their womb produces deceit.”
16 Job said in reply: 2 “I have heard many things like these before.All of you are troublesome comforters! 3 Is there an end to empty words?What provokes you to answer this way? 4 I could also speak as you do.If you were in my place,I could make persuasive speeches against youAnd shake my head at you. 5 Instead, though, I would strengthen you with the words of my mouth,And the consolation of my lips would bring relief. 6 If I speak, my own pain is not relieved,And if I stop speaking, how much is my pain reduced? 7 But now he has made me weary;He has devastated my whole household. 8 You also seize me, and it has become a witness,So that my own skinniness rises up and testifies to my face. 9 His anger has torn me to pieces, and he harbors animosity against me.He grinds his teeth against me.My adversary pierces me with his eyes.10 They have opened their mouth wide against me,And they have scornfully struck my cheeks;In large numbers they gather against me.11 God hands me over to young boys,And he thrusts me into the hands of the wicked.12 I was untroubled, but he shattered me;He grabbed me by the back of the neck and crushed me;Then he set me up as his target.13 His archers surround me;He pierces my kidneys and feels no compassion;He pours out my gall on the earth.14 He breaks through against me with breach after breach;He rushes at me like a warrior.15 I have sewn sackcloth together to cover my skin,And I have buried my dignity in the dust.16 My face is red from weeping,And on my eyelids is deep shadow,17 Although my hands have done no violenceAnd my prayer is pure.18 O earth, do not cover my blood!And let there be no resting-place for my outcry!19 Even now, my witness is in the heavens;The one who can testify for me is in the heights.20 My companions ridicule meAs my eye sheds tears to God.21 Let someone arbitrate between a man and God,As one would between a man and his fellow.22 For the years to come are few,And I will go away on the path of no return.
17 “My spirit has been broken, my days have been extinguished;The graveyard awaits me. 2 Mockers surround me,And my eye must gaze at their rebellious behavior. 3 Please accept my security, and keep it with you.Who else will shake hands with me and pledge in my behalf? 4 For you have concealed discernment from their heart;That is why you do not exalt them. 5 He may offer to share with his friends,While the eyes of his children fail. 6 He has made me an object of scorn among the peoples,So that I became one in whose face they spit. 7 From anguish my eyes grow dim,And all my limbs are but a shadow. 8 Upright people stare in amazement at this,And the innocent one is disturbed over the godless. 9 The righteous one keeps holding fast to his way,And the one with clean hands grows stronger.10 However, you may all come and resume your arguing,For I have not found anyone wise among you.11 My days are finished;My plans, the desires of my heart, have been shattered.12 They keep turning night into day,Saying, ‘Light must be near because it is dark.’13 If I wait, the Grave will become my home;I will spread out my bed in darkness.14 I will call out to the pit, ‘You are my father!’To the maggot, ‘My mother and my sister!’15 Where, then, is my hope?Who can see hope for me?16 It will go down to the barred gates of the GraveWhen we all descend together into the dust.”
18 Bilʹdad the Shuʹhite said in reply: 2 “How long before you stop making such speeches?Show some understanding so that we may then speak. 3 Why should we be viewed as animalsAnd be considered stupid in your eyes? 4 Even if you tear yourself to pieces in your anger,Will the earth be abandoned for your sake,Or will the rock move away from its place? 5 Yes, the light of the wicked will be extinguished,And the flame of his fire will not shine. 6 The light in his tent will certainly grow dark,And the lamp over him will be extinguished. 7 His vigorous stride is shortened,And his own counsel will make him fall. 8 For his feet will lead him into a net,And he will wander onto its mesh. 9 A trap will seize him by the heel;A snare will catch him.10 A rope is hidden for him on the ground,And a trap lies in his path.11 Terrors frighten him on all sidesAnd chase him at his feet.12 His strength fails him,And disaster will make him stagger.13 His skin is eaten away;The most deadly disease consumes his limbs.14 He is torn away from the security of his tentAnd marched to the king of terrors.15 Strangers will live in his tent;Sulfur will be scattered on his home.16 His roots will dry up beneath him,And his branches will wither above him.17 The memory of him will fade from the earth,And in the street his name will be unknown.18 He will be driven from the light into the darknessAnd chased away from the productive land.19 He will have no offspring and no descendants among his people,And he will be without a survivor in the place where he lives.20 When his day comes, the people in the West will be appalledAnd the people in the East will be seized with horror.21 This is what happens to the tents of a wrongdoerAnd to the place of the one who has not known God.”
19 Job said in reply: 2 “How long will you keep irritating my soul,Crushing me with words? 3 These ten times you have rebuked me;You are not ashamed to deal harshly with me. 4 And if indeed I made a mistake,My error remains with me. 5 If you insist on exalting yourselves over me,Claiming that the reproach against me is justified, 6 Know, then, that it is God who has misled me,And he has caught me in his hunting net. 7 Look! I keep crying out, ‘Violence!’ but I get no answer;I keep crying for help, but there is no justice. 8 My path he has blocked with a stone wall, and I cannot pass by;He has covered my roadways with darkness. 9 He has stripped me of my gloryAnd removed the crown from my head.10 He breaks me down on all sides until I perish;My hope he uproots like a tree.11 His anger burns against me,And he views me as his enemy.12 His troops come together and besiege me,And they camp around my tent.13 My own brothers he has driven far away from me,And those who know me have turned away from me.14 My close companions are gone,And those whom I knew well have forgotten me.15 Guests in my house and my slave girls consider me a stranger;I am a foreigner in their eyes.16 I call for my servant, but he does not respond;With my mouth I beg him for compassion.17 My very breath has become loathsome to my wife,And I am a stench to my own brothers.18 Even young children despise me;When I rise up, they begin jeering at me.19 All my close friends detest me,And those whom I loved have turned against me.20 My bones stick to my skin and my flesh,And I escape with the skin of my teeth.21 Show me mercy, my companions, show me mercy,For God’s own hand has touched me.22 Why do you keep persecuting me as God does,Attacking me without letup?23 If only my words were written down,If only they could be inscribed in a book!24 O that they were carved forever in the rock,With an iron stylus and lead!25 For I well know that my redeemer is alive;He will come later and rise up over the earth.26 After my skin has thus been destroyed,While yet in my flesh, I will see God,27 Whom I will see for myself,Whom my own eyes will see, not someone else’s.But deep inside I feel overwhelmed!28 For you say, ‘In what way are we persecuting him?’Since the root of the problem is with me.29 Be in fear of the sword yourselves,For the sword brings punishment against errors;You should know that there is a judge.”
2 Afterward the day came when the sons of the true God entered to take their station before Jehovah, and Satan also entered among them to take his station before Jehovah.2 Then Jehovah said to Satan: “Where have you come from?” Satan answered Jehovah: “From roving about on the earth and from walking about in it.” 3 And Jehovah said to Satan: “Have you taken note of my servant Job? There is no one like him on the earth. He is an upright man of integrity, fearing God and shunning what is bad. He is still holding firmly to his integrity, even though you try to incite me against him to destroy him for no reason.” 4 But Satan answered Jehovah: “Skin for skin. A man will give everything that he has for his life. 5 But, for a change, stretch out your hand and strike his bone and flesh, and he will surely curse you to your very face.”6 Then Jehovah said to Satan: “Look! He is in your hand! Only do not take his life!” 7 So Satan went out from the presence of Jehovah and struck Job with painful boils from the sole of his foot to the crown of his head. 8 And Job took a piece of broken pottery to scrape himself, and he was sitting among the ashes.9 Finally his wife said to him: “Are you still holding firmly to your integrity? Curse God and die!” 10 But he said to her: “You are talking like one of the senseless women. Should we accept only what is good from the true God and not accept also what is bad?” In all of this, Job did not sin with his lips.11 Three companions of Job heard about all the calamities that had come upon him, and each came from his own place—Elʹi·phaz the Teʹman·ite, Bilʹdad the Shuʹhite, and Zoʹphar the Naʹa·ma·thite. So they agreed to meet together to go and sympathize with Job and comfort him. 12 When they saw him from a distance, they did not recognize him. They began to weep loudly and to rip their garments apart, and they threw dust into the air and onto their heads. 13 Then they sat on the ground with him for seven days and seven nights. No one said a word to him, for they saw that his pain was very great.
20 Zoʹphar the Naʹa·ma·thite said in reply: 2 “This is why my own troubling thoughts urge me to answerBecause of the agitation I feel. 3 I have heard a reproof that insults me;And my understanding impels me to reply. 4 Surely you must have always known this,For it has been so since man was put on the earth, 5 That the joyful cry of the wicked is briefAnd the rejoicing of the godless one is for a moment. 6 Although his greatness ascends to heavenAnd his head reaches to the clouds, 7 He will perish forever like his own dung;Those who used to see him will say, ‘Where is he?’ 8 He will fly off like a dream, and they will not find him;He will be chased away like a vision of the night. 9 The eye that once saw him will not do so again,And his place will behold him no more.10 His own children will seek the favor of the poor,And his own hands will give back his wealth.11 His bones were full of youthful vigor,But it will lie down with him in mere dust.12 If what is bad tastes sweet in his mouth,If he hides it under his tongue,13 If he savors it and does not let it goBut keeps holding it in his mouth,14 His food will turn sour inside him;It will become like the poison of cobras within him.15 He has swallowed down wealth, but he will vomit it up;God will empty it out of his belly.16 The venom of cobras he will suck;The fangs of a viper will kill him.17 He will never see the streams of water,The torrents of honey and butter.18 He will give back his goods without consuming them;He will not enjoy the wealth from his trade.19 For he has crushed and abandoned the poor;He has seized a house that he did not build.20 But he will feel no peace within himself;His wealth will not help him escape.21 There is nothing left for him to devour;That is why his prosperity will not last.22 When his wealth reaches its peak, anxiety will overtake him;The full force of misfortune will come against him.23 As he fills his belly,God will send his burning anger upon him,Raining it down upon him into his bowels.24 When he flees from weapons of iron,Arrows from a copper bow will pierce him.25 He pulls an arrow from his back,A glittering weapon from his gall,And terror seizes him.26 Total darkness awaits his treasures;A fire that no one fanned will consume him;Calamity awaits any survivors in his tent.27 Heaven will uncover his error;The earth will rise up against him.28 A flood will sweep his house away;It will be a heavy torrent on the day of God’s anger.29 This is the wicked man’s share from God,The inheritance that God has decreed for him.”
21 Job said in reply: 2 “Listen carefully to what I say;Let this be the consolation you give me. 3 Bear with me while I speak;After I speak, you may then mock me. 4 Is my complaint directed toward a man?If it were, would I not lose patience? 5 Look at me and stare in amazement;Put your hand over your mouth. 6 When I think about it, I am disturbed,And my whole body shudders. 7 Why do the wicked live on,Grow old, and become wealthy? 8 Their children are always in their presence,And they get to see their descendants. 9 Their houses are secure, they are free from fear,And God does not punish them with his rod.10 Their bulls breed without failure;Their cows give birth and do not miscarry.11 Their boys run outside just like a flock,And their children skip about.12 They sing accompanied by tambourine and harpAnd rejoice at the sound of the flute.13 They spend their days in contentmentAnd go down peacefully to the Grave.14 But they say to the true God, ‘Leave us alone!We have no desire to know your ways.15 Who is the Almighty, that we should serve him?What would we gain by being acquainted with him?’16 But I know that they do not control their own prosperity.The thinking of the wicked is far from me.17 How often is the lamp of the wicked extinguished?How often does disaster come upon them?How often does God deal out destruction to them in his anger?18 Do they ever become like straw before the windAnd like chaff that a storm wind carries away?19 God will store up a man’s punishment for his own sons.But may God repay him so that he will know it.20 May his own eyes see his ruin,And may he be the one to drink from the rage of the Almighty.21 For what does he care about what happens to his house after himIf the number of his months is cut short?22 Can anyone teach knowledge to God,When He is the one who judges even the highest ones?23 One man dies in his full vigorWhen he is completely carefree and at ease,24 When his thighs are padded with fatAnd his bones are strong.25 But another man dies deeply distressed,Never having tasted good things.26 Together they will lie down in the dust,And maggots will cover both of them.27 Look! I know exactly what you are thinkingAnd the schemes you devise to wrong me.28 For you say, ‘Where is the house of the prominent man,And where is the tent in which the wicked one lived?’29 Have you not questioned travelers?Do you not carefully study their observations,30 That an evil person is spared on the day of disasterAnd rescued on the day of fury?31 Who will confront him about his way,And who will repay him for what he has done?32 When he is carried to the graveyard,A vigil will be kept over his tomb.33 The clods of earth of the valley will be sweet to him,And all mankind follows after himLike the countless number before him.34 So why offer me meaningless comfort?There is nothing but deceit in your answers!”
22 Elʹi·phaz the Teʹman·ite said in reply: 2 “Can a man be of use to God?Can anyone with insight be of benefit to him? 3 Does the Almighty care that you are righteous,Or does he gain anything because you follow the course of integrity? 4 Will he punish youAnd enter into judgment with you for your reverence? 5 Is it not because your own wickedness is so greatAnd there is no end to your errors? 6 For you seize a pledge from your brothers for no reason,And you strip people of their garments, leaving them naked. 7 You do not give the tired one a drink of water,And you hold back food from the hungry. 8 The land belongs to the powerful man,And the favored one dwells in it. 9 But you sent away widows empty-handed,And you crushed the arms of fatherless children.10 That is why you are surrounded by traps,And sudden terrors frighten you;11 That is why it is so dark that you cannot see,And a flood of water covers you.12 Is not God in the heights of heaven?And see how high all the stars are.13 But you have said: ‘What does God really know?Can he judge through thick gloom?14 Clouds screen him off so that he does not seeAs he walks about on the vault of heaven.’15 Will you follow the ancient pathThat wicked men have walked,16 Men who have been snatched away before their time,Whose foundation was washed away by a flood?17 They were saying to the true God: ‘Leave us alone!’And ‘What can the Almighty do to us?’18 Yet, he is the One who filled their houses with good things.(Such wicked thinking is far from my own.)19 The righteous will see this and rejoice,And the innocent will mock them and say:20 ‘Our opponents have been destroyed,And a fire will consume what is left of them.’21 Get to know Him, and you will be at peace;Then good things will come your way.22 Accept the law from his mouth,And keep his sayings in your heart.23 If you return to the Almighty, you will be restored;If you remove unrighteousness from your tent,24 If you would throw your gold into the dustAnd the gold of Oʹphir into the rocky ravines,25 Then the Almighty will become your gold,And he will be your choicest silver.26 For then your delight will be in the Almighty,And you will lift up your face to God.27 You will entreat him, and he will hear you;And your vows you will pay.28 Whatever you decide to do will succeed,And light will shine upon your path.29 For you will be humiliated when you speak arrogantly,But he will save the humble.30 He will rescue those who are innocent;So if your hands are clean, you will certainly be rescued.”
23 Job said in reply: 2 “Even today I will complain stubbornly;My strength is exhausted because of my sighing. 3 If only I knew where to find God!I would go to his place of dwelling. 4 I would present my case before himAnd fill my mouth with arguments; 5 I would learn how he would answer meAnd take note of what he says to me. 6 Would he contend with me using his great power?No, surely he would give me a hearing. 7 There the upright one could set matters straight with him,And I would be acquitted once and for all by my Judge. 8 But if I go east, he is not there;And I return and I cannot find him. 9 When he is working on the left, I cannot look upon him;Then he turns to the right, but I still do not see him.10 But he knows the path I have taken.After he has tested me, I will come out as pure gold.11 My feet have closely followed his footsteps;I have kept to his way without deviating.12 I have not departed from the commandment of his lips.I have treasured up his sayings even more than what was required of me.13 When he is determined, who can resist him?When he wants to do something, he does it.14 For he will carry out completely what has been determined for me,And he has many such things in store.15 That is why I am anxious because of him;When I think about him, my fear grows.16 God has made me fainthearted,And the Almighty has made me afraid.17 But I have not yet been silenced by the darknessNor by the gloom that has covered my face.
24 “Why does the Almighty not set a time?Why do those who know him not see his day? 2 People move boundary markers;They carry off flocks for their own pasture. 3 They drive away the donkey of fatherless childrenAnd seize the widow’s bull as security for a loan. 4 They force the poor off the road;The helpless of the earth must hide from them. 5 The poor forage for food like wild donkeys in the wilderness;They seek food in the desert for their children. 6 They must harvest in another’s fieldAnd glean from the vineyard of the wicked. 7 They spend the night naked, without clothing;They have no covering for the cold. 8 They are drenched by the mountain rains;They cling to the rocks for lack of shelter. 9 The fatherless child is snatched away from the breast;And the garments of the poor are taken as security for a loan,10 Forcing them to go about naked, without clothing,And hungry, as they carry the sheaves of grain.11 They toil among the terrace walls in the heat of the day;They tread the winepresses, yet they go thirsty.12 The dying keep groaning in the city;The fatally wounded cry for help,But God does not regard this as improper.13 There are those who rebel against light;They do not recognize its ways,And they do not follow its paths.14 The murderer rises at daybreak;He slays the helpless and the poor,While at night he engages in theft.15 The eye of the adulterer waits for the twilight,Saying, ‘No one will see me!’And he covers his face.16 In the darkness they break into houses;By day they shut themselves in.They are strangers to the light.17 For morning is the same as deep darkness for them;They are familiar with the terrors of deep darkness.18 But they are swiftly carried away by the waters.Their portion of the land will be cursed.They will not return to their vineyards.19 Just as drought and heat take away the melted snow,The Grave takes away those who have sinned!20 His mother will forget him; the maggot will feast on him.He will be remembered no more.And unrighteousness will be broken just like a tree.21 He preys on the barren woman,And mistreats the widow.22 God will use his strength to do away with the powerful;Though they may rise up, they have no assurance of life.23 God lets them become confident and secure,But his eyes are on everything they do.24 They are exalted for a little while, then they are no more.They are brought low and gathered like everyone else;They are cut off like heads of grain.25 Now who can prove me a liarOr refute my word?”
25 Bilʹdad the Shuʹhite said in reply: 2 “Rulership and fearsome might are his;He establishes peace in heaven. 3 Can his troops be numbered?Upon whom does his light not rise? 4 So how can mortal man be righteous before God,Or how can one born of a woman be innocent? 5 Even the moon is not brightAnd the stars are not pure in his eyes, 6 How much less so mortal man, who is a maggot,And a son of man, who is a worm!”
26 Job said in reply: 2 “How you have helped the one with no power!How you have saved the arm that has no strength! 3 What great advice you have given to the one lacking wisdom!How freely you have revealed your practical wisdom! 4 To whom are you trying to speak,And who inspired you to say such things? 5 Those who are powerless in death tremble;They are even lower than the waters and their inhabitants. 6 The Grave is naked in front of God,And the place of destruction lies uncovered. 7 He stretches out the northern sky over empty space,Suspending the earth upon nothing; 8 He wraps up the waters in his clouds,So that the clouds do not burst under their weight; 9 He shuts off the view of his throne,Spreading out his cloud over it.10 He marks out the horizon on the surface of the waters;He makes a boundary between light and darkness.11 The very pillars of heaven shake;They are stunned by his rebuke.12 He stirs up the sea with his power,And by his understanding he breaks the sea monster to pieces.13 With his breath he makes the skies clear;His hand pierces the elusive serpent.14 Look! These are just the fringes of his ways;Only a faint whisper has been heard of him!So who can understand his mighty thunder?”
27 Job continued his discourse, saying: 2 “As surely as God lives, who has deprived me of justice,As the Almighty lives, who has made me bitter, 3 As long as my breath is within meAnd spirit from God is in my nostrils, 4 My lips will not speak unrighteousness;Nor will my tongue mutter deceit! 5 It is unthinkable for me to declare you men righteous!Until I die, I will not renounce my integrity! 6 I will maintain my righteousness and never let it go;My heart will not condemn me as long as I live. 7 May my enemy become like the wicked,Those assaulting me like the unrighteous. 8 For what hope does the godless man have when he is destroyed,When God takes away his life? 9 Will God hear his outcryWhen distress comes upon him?10 Or will he find delight in the Almighty?Will he call on God at all times?11 I will teach you about the power of God;I will not hide anything about the Almighty.12 Look! If you have all seen visions,Why are your speeches completely empty?13 This is the wicked man’s share from God,The inheritance that tyrants receive from the Almighty.14 If his sons become many, they will fall by the sword,And his descendants will not have enough food.15 Those who survive him will be buried by the plague,And their widows will not weep for them.16 Even if he piles up silver like the dustAnd stores up fine clothing like the clay,17 Though he may gather it,The righteous man will wear it,And the innocent will divide up his silver.18 The house he builds is as fragile as a moth’s cocoon,Like a shelter made by a watchman.19 He will go to bed rich but will gather nothing;When he opens his eyes, nothing will be there.20 Terror overtakes him like a flood;A storm snatches him away by night.21 An east wind will carry him off, and he will be gone;It sweeps him away from his place.22 It will hurl itself at him without pityAs he desperately tries to flee from its force.23 It claps its hands at himAnd whistles at him from its place.
28 “There is a place to mine silverAnd a place for gold that they refine; 2 Iron is taken from the ground,And copper is smelted from rocks. 3 Man conquers the darkness;He probes to the limit in the gloom and darkness,Searching for ore. 4 He sinks a shaft far from where people reside,In forgotten places, far from where people walk;Some men descend and swing suspended. 5 Food grows on top of the earth;But below, there is an upheaval as if by fire. 6 There in the stones is sapphire,And the dust contains gold. 7 No bird of prey knows the path to it;The eye of a black kite has not seen it. 8 No majestic beasts have trodden on it;The young lion has not prowled there. 9 Man strikes the flinty rock with his hand;He overturns the mountains at their foundation.10 He cuts water channels in the rock;His eyes spot every precious thing.11 He dams up the sources of riversAnd brings what was hidden to the light.12 But wisdom—where can it be found,And where is the source of understanding?13 No man recognizes its value,And it cannot be found in the land of the living.14 The deep waters say, ‘It is not in me!’And the sea says, ‘It is not with me!’15 It cannot be bought with pure gold;Nor can silver be weighed out in exchange for it.16 It cannot be bought with gold of OʹphirNor with rare onyx and sapphire.17 Gold and glass cannot be compared to it;Nor can a vessel of fine gold be exchanged for it.18 Coral and crystal are not worthy of mention,For a bagful of wisdom is worth more than one full of pearls.19 The topaz of Cush cannot be compared to it;It cannot be purchased even with pure gold.20 But from where does wisdom come,And where is the source of understanding?21 It has been hidden from the eyes of every living thingAnd concealed from the birds of the heavens.22 Destruction and death say,‘Our ears have heard only a report of it.’23 God understands the way to find it;He alone knows where it resides,24 For he looks to the ends of the earth,And he sees everything under the heavens.25 When he set the force of the windAnd measured out the waters,26 When he made a regulation for the rainAnd a path for the thunderous storm cloud,27 Then he saw wisdom and explained it;He established and tested it.28 And he said to man:‘Look! The fear of Jehovah—that is wisdom,And to turn away from bad is understanding.’”
29 Job continued his discourse, saying: 2 “If only I were in the months gone by,In the days when God was watching over me, 3 When he caused his lamp to shine upon my head,When I walked through darkness by his light, 4 When I was in my prime,When God’s friendship was felt in my tent, 5 When the Almighty was still with me,When my children were all around me, 6 When my steps were awash in butter,And the rocks poured out streams of oil for me. 7 When I used to go out to the city gateAnd take my seat in the public square, 8 The young men would see me and step aside,And even the old men would rise and remain standing. 9 Princes refrained from speaking;They would put their hand over their mouth.10 The voices of the prominent men were silenced;Their tongue was stuck to the roof of their mouth.11 Whoever heard me would speak well of me,And those who saw me would testify for me.12 For I would rescue the poor who cried for help,Along with the fatherless child and anyone who had no helper.13 The one about to perish would bless me,And I made the heart of the widow rejoice.14 I put on righteousness as my clothing;My justice was like a robe and a turban.15 I became eyes to the blindAnd feet to the lame.16 I was a father to the poor;I would investigate the legal case of those I did not know.17 I would break the jaws of the wrongdoerAnd tear the prey away from his teeth.18 I used to say, ‘I will die in my own home,And my days will be as numerous as the grains of sand.19 My roots will spread out into the waters,And dew will stay all night on my branches.20 My glory is constantly renewed,And the bow in my hand will keep shooting.’21 People would listen expectantly,Waiting in silence for my advice.22 After I had spoken, they had nothing more to say;My words would fall gently on their ears.23 They waited for me as for the rain;They opened their mouth wide as for the spring rain.24 When I smiled at them, they could hardly believe it;The light of my face would reassure them.25 I gave them direction as their head,And I lived like a king among his troops,Like one who comforts the mourners.
3 It was after this that Job began to speak and to curse the day of his birth. 2 Job said: 3 “Let the day perish on which I was born,Also the night when someone said: ‘A man has been conceived!’ 4 Let that day be darkness.Let God above show no concern for it;Let no light shine upon it. 5 Let the deepest darkness reclaim it.Let a rain cloud settle over it.Let whatever darkens the day terrify it. 6 That night—let the gloom seize it;Let it not rejoice among the days of a year,And let it not enter among the number of the months. 7 Indeed! Let that night become barren;Let no joyful cry be heard in it. 8 Let those who curse the day put a curse on it,Those who are able to awaken Le·viʹa·than. 9 Let the stars of its twilight grow dark;Let it wait in vain for daylight,And let it not see the rays of dawn.10 For it did not close the doors of my mother’s womb;Nor did it hide trouble from my eyes.11 Why did I not die at birth?Why did I not perish when I came from the womb?12 Why were there knees to receive meAnd breasts to nurse me?13 For now I would be lying down undisturbed;I would be sleeping and at rest14 With kings of the earth and their advisers,Who built for themselves places that are now in ruins,15 Or with princes who possessed gold,Whose houses were filled with silver.16 Or why was I not like a hidden miscarriage,Like children who have never seen the light?17 There even the wicked have ceased from agitation;There the weary are at rest.18 There the prisoners are at ease together;They do not hear the voice of the one forcing them to work.19 Small and great are the same there,And the slave is set free from his master.20 Why does he give light to one who is sufferingAnd life to those in bitter distress?21 Why do they long for death, but it does not come?They dig for it more than for hidden treasures,22 Those who are rejoicing greatly,Who are happy when they find the grave.23 Why does he give light to a man who has lost his way,Whom God has hedged in?24 For in place of my food comes my sighing,And my groaning pours out like water.25 For what I have dreaded has come upon me,And what I have feared has befallen me.26 I have had no peace, no quiet, no rest,But trouble keeps coming.”
30 “Now they laugh at me—Men younger than I am,Whose fathers I would have refusedTo put with the dogs that guarded my flock. 2 Of what use was the power of their hands to me?Their vigor has perished. 3 They are worn out from want and hunger;They gnaw at the parched groundThat was already ruined and desolated. 4 They gather the salt herb from the bushes;Their food is the root of broom trees. 5 They are driven out of the community;People shout at them as they would at a thief. 6 They live on the slopes of ravines,In holes in the ground and in the rocks. 7 From the bushes they cry outAnd huddle together among the nettles. 8 As sons of the senseless and the nameless ones,They have been driven out of the land. 9 But now they mock me even in their songs;I have become an object of scorn to them.10 They detest me and keep their distance from me;They do not hesitate to spit in my face.11 Because God has disarmed me and humbled me,They throw off all restraint in my presence.12 On my right they rise up like a mob;They put me to flightAnd put up barriers of destruction in my path.13 They tear up my roadwaysAnd make my calamity worse,Without anyone to stop them.14 They come as if through a wide breach in the wall;They roll in amid the devastation.15 Terror overwhelms me;My dignity is driven away like the wind,And my salvation vanishes like a cloud.16 Now my life ebbs from me;Days of affliction take hold of me.17 Aching pierces my bones at night;The gnawing pain never stops.18 With great force my garment is disfigured;Like the collar of my garment, it chokes me.19 God has thrown me down into the mud;I am reduced to dust and ashes.20 I cry to you for help, but you do not answer me;I stand up, but you just look at me.21 You have cruelly turned against me;With the full might of your hand, you assault me.22 You pick me up and carry me off with the wind;Then you toss me about in the storm.23 For I know that you will bring me down to death,To the house where everyone living will meet.24 But no one would strike at a broken manAs he cries for help during his time of disaster.25 Have I not wept for those who have fallen on hard times?Have I not grieved for the poor?26 Although I hoped for good, bad came;I expected the light, but darkness came.27 The churning inside me did not stop;Days of affliction confronted me.28 I walk about gloomy; there is no sunlight.In the assembly, I rise and cry for help.29 I have become a brother to jackalsAnd a companion to the daughters of the ostrich.30 My skin has blackened and fallen off;My bones burn from the heat.31 My harp is used only for mourning,And my flute for the sound of weeping.
31 “I have made a covenant with my eyes.So how could I show improper attention to a virgin? 2 What, then, would be my share from God above,What inheritance from the Almighty on high? 3 Does not disaster await the wrongdoerAnd calamity those doing what is harmful? 4 Does he not see my waysAnd count all my steps? 5 Have I ever walked in untruth?Has my foot hurried to deceive? 6 Let God weigh me with accurate scales;Then he will recognize my integrity. 7 If my footsteps deviate from the wayOr my heart has followed after my eyesOr my hands have been defiled, 8 Then let me sow seed and someone else eat,And let what I plant be uprooted. 9 If my heart has been enticed by a womanAnd I have lain in wait at my neighbor’s door,10 Then let my wife grind grain for another man,And let other men have sexual relations with her.11 For that would be shameful conduct,An error deserving punishment by the judges.12 It would be a fire that would devour and destroy,Consuming even the roots of all my produce.13 If I denied justice to my male or female servantsWhen they had a complaint against me,14 What can I do when God confronts me?What can I answer him when he calls for an accounting?15 Did not the One who made me in the womb also make them?Was it not the same One who formed us before our birth?16 If I refused to give the poor what they desiredOr saddened the eyes of the widow;17 If I ate my portion of food aloneWithout sharing it with the orphans;18 (For from my youth the orphan grew up with me as though I were his father,And I have been a guide for the widow from childhood.)19 If I saw anyone perishing for lack of clothingOr a poor man with nothing to cover himself;20 If he did not bless meAs he warmed himself with the wool of my sheep;21 If I shook my fist against the orphanWhen he needed my assistance in the city gate;22 Then let my arm fall from my shoulder,And let my arm be broken at the elbow.23 For I dreaded disaster from God,And I could not stand before his dignity.24 If I put my confidence in goldOr said to fine gold, ‘You are my security!’25 If I found my joy in my great wealthBecause of the many possessions I acquired;26 If I saw the sun shiningOr the moon moving in its splendor;27 And my heart was secretly enticed,And my mouth kissed my hand in worship of them;28 Then that would be an error deserving punishment by the judges,For I would have denied the true God above.29 Have I ever rejoiced over the destruction of my enemyOr gloated because evil befell him?30 I never allowed my mouth to sinBy asking for his life in an oath.31 Have the men of my tent not said,‘Who can find anyone who has not been satisfied with his food?’32 No stranger had to spend the night outside;I opened my doors to the traveler.33 Have I ever tried to cover over my transgressions, like other men,By hiding my error in the pocket of my garment?34 Have I been in fear of the reaction of the multitude,Or have I been terrified by the contempt of other families,Making me silent and afraid to go outside?35 If only someone would listen to me!I would sign my name to what I have said.Let the Almighty answer me!If only my accuser had written out the charges in a document!36 I would carry it on my shoulder,And I would bind it around my head like a crown.37 I would give him an accounting for every step I took;I would approach him confidently, like a prince.38 If my own ground would cry out against meAnd its furrows would weep together;39 If I have eaten its fruitage without payment,Or if I have caused its owners to despair;40 Then let thorns sprout for me instead of wheatAnd foul-smelling weeds instead of barley.”The words of Job end here.
32 So these three men stopped trying to answer Job, because he was convinced of his own righteousness. 2 But E·liʹhu the son of Barʹa·chel the Buzʹite of the family of Ram had become very angry. His anger blazed against Job for trying to prove himself right rather than God. 3 He was also very angry with Job’s three companions because they could not find an answer but had declared God wicked. 4 E·liʹhu had been waiting to respond to Job, because they were older than he was. 5 When E·liʹhu saw that the three men had nothing to say in answer, his anger flared up. 6 So E·liʹhu the son of Barʹa·chel the Buzʹite began to speak, saying:“I am youngAnd you men are aged.So I respectfully held back,And I dared not tell you what I know. 7 I thought, ‘Let age speak,And let a multitude of years declare wisdom.’ 8 But it is the spirit in people,The breath of the Almighty, that gives them understanding. 9 Age alone does not make one wise,Nor is it only old men who understand what is right.10 So I say, ‘Listen to me,And I will also tell you what I know.’11 Look! I have waited for your words;I kept listening to your reasoningAs you searched for things to say.12 I paid close attention to you,But none of you could prove Job wrongOr answer his arguments.13 So do not say, ‘We have found wisdom;It is God who refutes him, not a man.’14 He did not direct his words against me,So I will not reply to him with your arguments.15 They are dismayed, they have no more answers;They have nothing left to say.16 I have waited, but they do not continue speaking;They just stand there, with no further answer.17 So I too will give an answer;I too will tell what I know,18 For I am full of words;The spirit within me compels me.19 My insides are like wine that has no vent,Like new wineskins ready to burst.20 Let me speak so that I can find relief!I will open my lips and give an answer.21 I will not show partiality to anyone;Nor will I flatter any human,22 For I do not know how to flatter;If I did, my Maker would quickly do away with me.
33 “But now, Job, please hear my words;Listen to everything I say. 2 Look, please! I must open my mouth;My tongue must speak. 3 My words declare the uprightness of my heart,And my lips sincerely tell what I know. 4 God’s own spirit made me,And the Almighty’s own breath brought me to life. 5 Reply to me if you are able;Present your arguments before me; take your position. 6 Look! I am just like you before the true God;From the clay I too was shaped. 7 So no fear of me should terrify you,And no pressure from me should overwhelm you. 8 But you said in my hearing,Yes, I kept hearing these words, 9 ‘I am pure, without transgression;I am clean, without error.10 But God finds reasons to oppose me;He considers me his enemy.11 He puts my feet in stocks;He scrutinizes all my paths.’12 But you are not right in saying this, so I will answer you:God is far greater than mortal man.13 Why do you complain against Him?Is it because he did not answer all your words?14 For God speaks once and a second time,But no one pays attention,15 In a dream, a vision of the night,When deep sleep falls upon peopleWhile they sleep in their beds.16 Then he uncovers their earsAnd impresses his instruction upon them,17 To turn a person away from wrongdoingAnd to protect a man from pride.18 God spares his soul from the pit,His life from perishing by the sword.19 A person is also reproved by pain on his bedAnd by the constant distress of his bones,20 So that his very being loathes bread,And he rejects even fine food.21 His flesh wastes away from sight,And his bones that were hidden now protrude.22 His soul draws near to the pit;His life to those who bring death.23 If there is a messenger for him,One advocate out of a thousand,To tell to man what is upright,24 Then God shows him favor and says,‘Spare him from going down into the pit!I have found a ransom!25 Let his flesh become fresher than in youth;Let him return to the days of his youthful vigor.’26 He will entreat God, who will accept him,And he will see His face with shouts of joy,And He will restore His righteousness to mortal man.27 That person will declare to men,‘I have sinned and distorted what is right,But I did not receive what I deserved.28 He has redeemed my soul from going into the pit,And my life will see the light.’29 Indeed, God does all these thingsTwice, three times, for a man,30 To bring him back from the pit,So that he may be enlightened with the light of life.31 Pay attention, Job! Listen to me!Keep silent, and I will continue speaking.32 If you have something to say, reply to me.Speak, for I want to prove you right.33 If you have nothing to say, you should listen to me;Keep silent, and I will teach you wisdom.”
34 So E·liʹhu continued to say in reply: 2 “Listen to my words, you who are wise;Hear me, you who know so much. 3 For the ear tests wordsJust as the tongue tastes food. 4 Let us evaluate for ourselves what is right;Let us decide among ourselves what is good. 5 For Job has said, ‘I am in the right,But God has denied me justice. 6 Would I lie about what my own judgment should be?My wound is incurable, though there is no transgression.’ 7 What other man is like Job,Who drinks up derision like water? 8 He is in company with wrongdoersAnd in association with wicked men. 9 For he has said, ‘A man does not benefitFrom trying to please God.’10 So listen to me, you men of understanding:It is unthinkable for the true God to act wickedly,For the Almighty to do wrong!11 For he will reward a man according to what he doesAnd bring upon him the consequences of his ways.12 For a certainty, God does not act wickedly;The Almighty does not pervert justice.13 Who put him in charge of the earth,And who appointed him over the whole world?14 If he fixes his attention on them,If he gathers their spirit and breath to himself,15 All humans would perish together,And mankind would return to the dust.16 So if you have understanding, pay attention to this;Listen carefully to what I say.17 Should someone who hates justice be in control,Or would you condemn a powerful one who is righteous?18 Would you say to a king, ‘You are good for nothing,’Or to nobles, ‘You are wicked’?19 There is One who does not show partiality to princesAnd who does not favor the rich over the poor,For they are all the work of his hands.20 They may die suddenly, in the middle of the night;They shake violently and pass away;Even the powerful are removed, but not by human hands.21 For God’s eyes are upon the ways of a man,And He sees all his steps.22 There is no darkness or deep shadowWhere wrongdoers can conceal themselves.23 For God has not set an appointed time for any manTo appear before him in judgment.24 He breaks the powerful without needing to investigateAnd sets up others in their place.25 For he knows what they are doing;He overthrows them during the night, and they are crushed.26 He strikes them for their wickedness,In a place where all can see,27 Because they have turned away from following himAnd have no regard for any of his ways;28 They cause the poor to cry out to him,So that he hears the outcry of the helpless.29 When God remains silent, who can condemn him?When he hides his face, who can see him?Whether toward a nation or a man, the result is the same,30 So that a godless person may not ruleOr lay snares for the people.31 For will anyone say to God,‘I have been punished, although I have committed no offense;32 Teach me what I have failed to see;If I have done anything wrong, I will not do it again’?33 Should he reward you on your terms when you reject his judgment?You must decide, not I.So tell me what you know so well.34 Men of understanding will say to me—Any wise man who hears me—35 ‘Job speaks without knowledge,And his words lack insight.’36 Let Job be tested to the limitBecause his replies are like those of wicked men!37 He adds rebellion to his sin;He scornfully claps his hands before usAnd multiplies his words against the true God!”
35 E·liʹhu continued his response: 2 “Are you so convinced that you are right that you would say,‘I am more righteous than God’? 3 For you say, ‘What does it matter to you?Am I better off than if I had sinned?’ 4 I will reply to youAnd to your companions with you. 5 Look up to heaven and see,Observe the clouds, which are high above you. 6 If you sin, how do you hurt him?If your transgressions multiply, what do you do to him? 7 If you are righteous, what do you give him;What does he receive from you? 8 Your wickedness affects only a human like yourself,And your righteousness, a son of man. 9 People cry out when under great oppression;They cry for relief from the domination of the powerful.10 But no one says, ‘Where is God, my Grand Maker,The one causing songs to be sung in the night?’11 He teaches us more than the beasts of the earth,And he makes us wiser than the birds of the heavens.12 People cry out, but he does not answer,Because of the pride of the wicked.13 Surely God does not hear an empty cry;The Almighty does not pay attention to it.14 How much less, then, when you complain that you do not see him!Your legal case is before him, so you should wait anxiously for him.15 For he has not angrily called for an accounting;Nor has he taken note of your extreme rashness.16 Job opens his mouth wide in vain;He multiplies words without knowledge.”
36 E·liʹhu continued: 2 “Be patient with me a little longer while I explain,For I still have words to speak on God’s behalf. 3 I will speak comprehensively about what I know,And I will ascribe righteousness to my Maker. 4 Truly my words are not false;The One perfect in knowledge is here before you. 5 Indeed, God is mighty and rejects no one;He is great in his power of understanding. 6 He will not preserve the lives of the wicked,But he gives justice to the afflicted. 7 He does not take his eyes off the righteous;He enthrones them with kings, and they are exalted forever. 8 But if they are bound in shacklesAnd caught in ropes of affliction, 9 He reveals to them what they have done,Their transgressions caused by their pride.10 He opens their ears to correctionAnd tells them to turn away from wrongdoing.11 If they obey and serve him,They will live out their days in prosperity,And their years will be pleasant.12 But if they do not obey, they will perish by the swordAnd die without knowledge.13 The godless at heart will harbor resentment.They do not cry for help even when he binds them.14 They die while still young,Spending their life among male temple prostitutes.15 But God rescues the afflicted during their affliction;He opens their ear when they are oppressed.16 He draws you away from the brink of distressTo a broad space, free of restriction,With rich food on your table as consolation.17 Then you will be satisfied with the judgment on the wicked,When judgment is rendered and justice is upheld.18 But take care that rage does not lead you into spitefulness,And do not let a large bribe lead you astray.19 Would your cry for helpOr any of your strenuous efforts keep you from distress?20 Do not long for the night,When people vanish from their place.21 Beware that you do not turn to wrongdoing,Choosing this instead of affliction.22 Look! God is exalted in his power;What instructor is like him?23 Who has directed his wayOr said to him, ‘What you have done is wrong’?24 Remember to magnify his activity,Of which men have sung.25 All mankind has seen it,Mortal man looks on from a distance.26 Yes, God is greater than we can know;The number of his years is beyond comprehension.27 He draws up the drops of water;They condense into rain from his mist;28 Then the clouds pour it down;They shower down upon mankind.29 Can anyone understand the layers of clouds,The thundering from his tent?30 See how he spreads his lightning over itAnd covers the depths of the sea.31 By these he sustains the peoples;He gives them food in abundance.32 With his hands he covers the lightning,And he directs it against its target.33 His thunder tells about him,Even the livestock tell who is coming.
37 “At this my heart poundsAnd leaps from its place. 2 Listen carefully to the rumbling of his voiceAnd the thunder that comes from his mouth. 3 He unleashes it under the entire heavensAnd sends his lightning to the ends of the earth. 4 After that is a roaring sound;He thunders with a majestic voice,And he does not hold it back when his voice is heard. 5 God thunders with his voice in a wonderful way;He does great things that are beyond our understanding. 6 For he says to the snow, ‘Fall to the earth,’And to the downpour of rain, ‘Pour down mightily.’ 7 God puts a stop to all human activitySo that every mortal man will know His work. 8 The wild animals go into their densAnd remain in their lairs. 9 The storm wind blows from its chamber,And the cold comes from the north winds.10 By the breath of God, the ice is produced,And the broad waters are frozen solid.11 Yes, he weighs down the clouds with moisture;He scatters his lightning in the clouds;12 They swirl around where he directs them;They carry out whatever he commands on the surface of the inhabited earth.13 Whether it is for punishment or for the sake of the landOr for loyal love, he causes it to happen.14 Listen to this, Job;Stop and consider carefully the wonderful works of God.15 Do you know how God controls the cloudsAnd how he causes the lightning to flash from his cloud?16 Do you know how the clouds float?These are the wonderful works of the One perfect in knowledge.17 Why does your clothing become hotWhen the earth is still because of the south wind?18 Can you, with him, spread out the skiesAs solid as a metal mirror?19 Tell us what we should say to him;We cannot answer because we are in the dark.20 Should he be told that I want to speak?Or has anyone said something that should be communicated to him?21 They cannot even see the light,Though it is bright in the sky,Until a wind passes by and clears away the clouds.22 Out of the north comes golden splendor;God’s majesty is awe-inspiring.23 Understanding the Almighty is beyond our reach;He is great in power,And he never violates his justice and abundant righteousness.24 Therefore, people should fear him.For he does not favor any who think that they are wise.”
38 Then Jehovah answered Job out of the windstorm: 2 “Who is this who is obscuring my counselAnd speaking without knowledge? 3 Brace yourself, please, like a man;I will question you, and you inform me. 4 Where were you when I founded the earth?Tell me, if you think you understand. 5 Who set its measurements, in case you know,Or who stretched a measuring line across it? 6 Into what were its pedestals sunk,Or who laid its cornerstone, 7 When the morning stars joyfully cried out together,And all the sons of God began shouting in applause? 8 And who barricaded the sea behind doorsWhen it burst out from the womb, 9 When I clothed it with cloudsAnd wrapped it in thick gloom,10 When I established my limit for itAnd put its bars and doors in place,11 And I said, ‘You may come this far, and no farther;Here is where your proud waves will stop’?12 Have you ever commanded the morningOr made the dawn know its place,13 To take hold of the ends of the earthAnd to shake the wicked out of it?14 It is transformed like clay under a seal,And its features stand out like those of a garment.15 But the light of the wicked is held back from them,And their uplifted arm is broken.16 Have you gone down to the sources of the seaOr explored the deep waters?17 Have the gates of death been revealed to you,Or have you seen the gates of deep darkness?18 Have you understood the vast expanse of the earth?Tell me, if you know all of this.19 In which direction does the light reside?And where is the place of darkness,20 That you should take it to its territoryAnd understand the paths to its home?21 Do you know this because you were already bornAnd the number of your years is great?22 Have you entered the storehouses of the snow,Or have you seen the storehouses of the hail,23 Which I have reserved for the time of distress,For the day of battle and war?24 From what direction is light dispersed,And from where does the east wind blow on the earth?25 Who has cut a channel for the floodAnd made a path for the thunderous storm cloud,26 To make it rain where no man lives,On the wilderness where there are no humans,27 To satisfy devastated wastelandsAnd cause the grass to sprout?28 Does the rain have a father,Or who fathered the dewdrops?29 From whose womb did the ice emerge,And who gave birth to the frost of heaven30 When the waters are covered as if with stone,And the surface of the deep waters is frozen solid?31 Can you tie the ropes of the Kiʹmah constellationOr untie the cords of the Keʹsil constellation?32 Can you lead out a constellation in its seasonOr guide the Ash constellation along with its sons?33 Do you know the laws governing the heavens,Or can you impose their authority on the earth?34 Can you raise your voice to the cloudsTo cause a flood of water to cover you?35 Can you send out lightning bolts?Will they come and say to you, ‘Here we are!’36 Who put wisdom within the cloudsOr gave understanding to the sky phenomenon?37 Who is wise enough to count the clouds,Or who can tip over the water jars of heaven38 When the dust pours into a massAnd the clods of earth stick together?39 Can you hunt prey for a lionOr satisfy the appetites of young lions40 When they crouch in their lairsOr lie in ambush in their dens?41 Who prepares food for the ravenWhen its young cry to God for helpAnd wander about because there is nothing to eat?
39 “Do you know the time when the mountain goats give birth?Have you watched the deer give birth to their young? 2 Do you count the months that they must complete?Do you know the time when they give birth? 3 They crouch down when they give birth to their young,And their labor pains end. 4 Their young become strong and grow up in the open field;They go out and do not return to them. 5 Who set the wild donkey free,And who untied the ropes of the wild donkey? 6 I have made the desert plain its homeAnd the salt land its dwelling. 7 It scorns the tumult of the city;It does not hear the shouts of the driver. 8 It roams the hills, seeking pasture,Looking for every green plant. 9 Is the wild bull willing to serve you?Will it spend the night in your stable?10 Will you hold a wild bull to the furrow with a rope,Or will it follow you to plow the valley?11 Will you trust in its great strengthAnd let it do your heavy work?12 Will you rely on it to bring back your harvest,And will it gather it to your threshing floor?13 The wings of the ostrich flap joyfully,But can her pinions and plumage compare with the stork’s?14 For she leaves her eggs on the ground,And she keeps them warm in the dust.15 She forgets that some foot may crush themOr that a wild animal may trample them.16 She treats her sons harshly, as if they were not hers;She has no fear that her labor may be in vain.17 For God has deprived her of wisdomAnd given her no share in understanding.18 But when she rises up and flaps her wings,She laughs at the horse and at its rider.19 Are you the one who gives the horse its strength?Do you clothe its neck with a rustling mane?20 Can you cause it to leap like a locust?Its majestic snorting is terrifying.21 It paws the ground in the valley and exults mightily;It charges into the battle.22 It laughs at fear and is afraid of nothing.It does not turn back because of the sword.23 The quiver rattles against it,The spear and the javelin flash.24 Trembling with excitement, it surges forward,It cannot stand still at the sound of the horn.25 When the horn blows, it says, ‘Aha!’It smells the battle from afarAnd hears the shouting of commanders and the battle cry.26 Is it by your understanding that the falcon soars,Spreading its wings to the south?27 Or is it at your order that an eagle flies upwardAnd builds its nest high up,28 Spending the night on a cliff,Dwelling in its stronghold on a rocky crag?29 From there it searches for food;Its eyes look far into the distance.30 Its young sip up blood;And wherever the slain are, there it is.”
4 Elʹi·phaz the Teʹman·ite then said in reply: 2 “If someone tries to speak to you, will you become impatient?For who can hold back from speaking? 3 True, you have corrected many,And you used to strengthen the weak hands. 4 Your words would raise up anyone stumbling,And you would strengthen those whose knees were buckling. 5 But now it has happened to you, and you are overwhelmed;It touches you, and you are dismayed. 6 Does your reverence for God not give you confidence?Does your way of integrity not give you hope? 7 Remember, please: What innocent person has ever perished?When have the upright ever been destroyed? 8 What I have seen is that those who plow what is harmfulAnd those who sow trouble will reap the same. 9 By the breath of God they perish,And through a blast of his anger they come to an end.10 The lion roars, and a young lion growls,But even the teeth of strong lions are broken.11 A lion perishes for lack of prey,And the cubs of a lion are scattered.12 Now a word was brought to me in secret,And a whisper of it reached my ear.13 In troubling thoughts during visions of the night,When deep sleep falls upon men,14 A terrible trembling came upon me,Filling all my bones with dread.15 A spirit passed over my face;The hair of my flesh bristled.16 It then stood still,But I did not recognize its appearance.A form was in front of my eyes;There was a calm, and then I heard a voice:17 ‘Can a mortal man be more righteous than God?Can a man be cleaner than his own Maker?’18 Look! He has no faith in his servants,And he finds fault with his angels.19 How much more so with those dwelling in houses of clay,Whose foundation is in the dust,Who are crushed as easily as a moth!20 They are completely crushed from morning to evening;They perish forever, and no one takes notice.21 Are they not like a tent whose cord is pulled out?They die without wisdom.
40 Jehovah continued to answer Job: 2 “Should a faultfinder contend with the Almighty?Let the one who wants to reprove God answer.” 3 Job said in answer to Jehovah: 4 “Look! I am unworthy.What can I reply to you?I put my hand over my mouth. 5 I spoke once, but I will not answer again;Twice, but I will say no more.” 6 Then Jehovah answered Job out of the windstorm: 7 “Brace yourself, please, like a man;I will question you, and you inform me. 8 Will you call into question my justice?Will you condemn me so that you may be right? 9 Do you have an arm as powerful as the true God’s,Or can your voice thunder like his?10 Adorn yourself, please, with glory and majesty;Clothe yourself with dignity and splendor.11 Release the fury of your anger;Look at everyone who is haughty, and bring him low.12 Look at everyone who is haughty, and humble him,And tread down the wicked where they stand.13 Hide them all in the dust;Bind them in the hidden place,14 Then even I would acknowledge to youThat your right hand can save you.15 Here, now, is Be·heʹmoth, which I made as I made you.It eats grass like a bull.16 Look at the strength in its hipsAnd the power in the muscles of its belly!17 It stiffens its tail like a cedar;The sinews of its thighs are woven together.18 Its bones are tubes of copper;Its limbs are like wrought-iron rods.19 It ranks first among the works of God;Only its Maker can approach it with his sword.20 For the mountains produce food for it,Where all the wild animals play.21 It lies down under the lotus trees,In the shelter of the reeds of the marsh.22 The lotus trees cast their shadow on it,And the poplars of the valley surround it.23 If the river is turbulent, it does not panic.It is confident, although the Jordan rushes against its mouth.24 Can anyone capture it while it is watching,Or pierce its nose with a hook?
41 “Can you catch Le·viʹa·than with a fishhookOr hold down its tongue with a rope? 2 Can you put a rope through its nostrilsOr pierce its jaws with a hook? 3 Will it make many pleas to you,Or will it speak gently to you? 4 Will it make a covenant with you,So that you may make it your slave for life? 5 Will you play with it as with a birdOr tie it on a leash for your little girls? 6 Will traders barter for it?Will they divide it up among merchants? 7 Will you fill its hide with harpoonsOr its head with fishing spears? 8 Lay your hand on it;You will remember the battle and never do it again! 9 Any hope of subduing it is futile.The mere sight of it would overwhelm you.10 No one dares to stir it up.So who is it who can stand up to me?11 Who has given me anything first that I should repay him?Whatever is under the heavens is mine.12 I will not be silent about its limbs,About its mightiness and its well-formed body.13 Who has removed its outer covering?Who will enter its open jaws?14 Who can pry open the doors of its mouth?Its teeth all around are fearsome.15 Its back has rows of scalesTightly sealed together.16 Each one fits so closely to the otherThat no air can come between them.17 They are stuck to one another;They cling together and cannot be separated.18 Its snorting flashes out light,And its eyes are like the rays of dawn.19 Flashes of lightning go out of its mouth;Fiery sparks escape.20 Smoke pours out of its nostrils,Like a furnace fueled with rushes.21 Its breath sets coals ablaze,And a flame shoots from its mouth.22 There is great strength in its neck,And dismay runs before it.23 The folds of its flesh are tightly joined together;They are firm, as though cast upon it and immovable.24 Its heart is hard as stone,Yes, hard as a lower millstone.25 When it rises up, even the mighty are frightened;Its thrashing causes bewilderment.26 No sword that reaches it will prevail;Nor will spear, dart, or arrowhead.27 It regards iron as straw,Copper as rotten wood.28 An arrow does not make it flee;Slingstones turn into stubble against it.29 It regards a club as stubble,And it laughs at the rattling of a javelin.30 Underneath, it is like sharp fragments of pottery;It spreads itself in the mud like a threshing sledge.31 It makes the deep boil just like a pot;It stirs up the sea like an ointment pot.32 It leaves a glistening wake in its path.One would think that the deep had white hair.33 There is nothing like it on the earth,A creature made to have no fear.34 It glares at everything that is haughty.It is king over all the majestic wild beasts.”
42 Then Job said in reply to Jehovah: 2 “Now I know that you are able to do all thingsAnd that nothing you have in mind to do is impossible for you. 3 You said, ‘Who is this who is obscuring my counsel without knowledge?’Therefore I spoke, but without understandingAbout things too wonderful for me, which I do not know. 4 You said, ‘Please listen, and I will speak.I will question you, and you inform me.’ 5 My ears have heard about you,But now I do see you with my eyes. 6 That is why I take back what I said,And I repent in dust and ashes.”7 After Jehovah had spoken these words to Job, Jehovah said to Elʹi·phaz the Teʹman·ite:“My anger burns against you and your two companions, for you have not spoken the truth about me as my servant Job has. 8 Now take seven bulls and seven rams and go to my servant Job, and offer up a burnt sacrifice for yourselves. And my servant Job will pray for you. I will surely accept his request not to deal with you according to your foolishness, for you have not spoken the truth about me as my servant Job has.”9 So Elʹi·phaz the Teʹman·ite, Bilʹdad the Shuʹhite, and Zoʹphar the Naʹa·ma·thite went and did what Jehovah had told them to do. And Jehovah accepted Job’s prayer.10 After Job had prayed for his companions, Jehovah removed Job’s tribulation and restored his prosperity. Jehovah gave him double what he had before. 11 All his brothers and sisters and all his former friends came to him and ate a meal with him in his house. They sympathized with him and comforted him over all the calamity that Jehovah had allowed to come upon him. Each of them gave him a piece of money and a gold ring.12 So Jehovah blessed the last part of Job’s life more than the beginning, and Job came to have 14,000 sheep, 6,000 camels, 1,000 pairs of cattle, and 1,000 female donkeys. 13 He also came to have seven more sons and three more daughters. 14 He named the first daughter Je·miʹmah, the second Ke·ziʹah, and the third Kerʹen-hapʹpuch. 15 No women in all the land were as beautiful as Job’s daughters, and their father gave them an inheritance along with their brothers.16 After this Job lived for 140 years, and he saw his children and his grandchildren—four generations. 17 Finally Job died, after a long and satisfying life.
5 “Call, please! Is there anyone answering you?To which of the holy ones will you turn? 2 For resentment will kill the foolish one,And envy will put the simpleminded to death. 3 I have seen the foolish one taking root,But suddenly his dwelling place is cursed. 4 His sons are far from safety,And they are crushed at the city gate, with no one to save them. 5 The hungry one eats what he harvests,Taking it even from among the thorns,And their possessions are ensnared. 6 For harmful things do not sprout from the dust,And trouble does not spring from the ground. 7 For man is born for trouble,As surely as sparks fly upward. 8 But I would appeal to God,And to God I would submit my case, 9 To the One doing great and unsearchable things,Wonderful things without number.10 He gives rain to the earthAnd sends waters upon the fields.11 He raises the lowly up high,And he raises up the dejected one to salvation.12 He frustrates the schemes of the crafty,So that the work of their hands does not succeed.13 He catches the wise in their own cunning,So that the plans of the shrewd are thwarted.14 They meet with darkness during the day,And they grope about at midday as if it were night.15 He saves from the sword of their mouth,Saving the poor from the hand of the strong,16 So that there is hope for the lowly,But the mouth of unrighteousness is shut.17 Look! Happy is the man whom God reproves;So do not reject the discipline of the Almighty!18 For he causes pain, but binds up the wound;He breaks apart, but heals with his own hands.19 He will save you from six calamities,Even the seventh will not harm you.20 During famine he will redeem you from death,And from the power of a sword during war.21 You will be protected from the lash of the tongue,And you will not fear devastation when it comes.22 You will laugh at destruction and hunger,And you will not fear the wild beasts of the earth.23 For the stones of the field will not harm you,And the wild beasts of the field will be at peace with you.24 You will know that your tent is secure,And nothing will be missing when you inspect your pasture.25 You will enjoy many children,And your descendants will be as plentiful as the vegetation of the earth.26 You will still be strong when you go to the grave,Like sheaves of grain gathered in their season.27 Look! We have investigated this, and it is so.Listen and accept it.”
6 Job then said in reply: 2 “If only my anguish could be fully weighedAnd put on scales together with my calamity! 3 For now it is heavier than the sands of the seas.That is why my words have been wild talk. 4 For the arrows of the Almighty have pierced me,And my spirit is drinking their venom;The terrors from God are lined up against me. 5 Will a wild donkey cry out when it has grass,Or will a bull bellow when it has fodder? 6 Is tasteless food eaten without salt,Or is there flavor in the juice of a mallow? 7 I have refused to touch such things.They are like contamination in my food. 8 O that my request would be realizedAnd that God would grant my desire! 9 That God would be willing to crush me,And that he would reach out his hand and do away with me!10 For even that would bring me comfort;I would leap for joy despite the unrelenting pain,For I have not denied the sayings of the Holy One.11 Do I have the strength to keep waiting?And what end awaits me, that I should continue to live?12 Is my strength like that of rock?Or is my flesh made of copper?13 Is there any way that I can help myselfWhen all my means of support has been driven from me?14 Anyone who withholds loyal love from his fellow manWill forsake the fear of the Almighty.15 My own brothers have been as treacherous as a winter stream,Like the water of winter streams that dry up.16 They are darkened by ice,And in them the melting snow is hidden.17 But in due season they become waterless and come to an end;When it becomes hot, they dry up.18 Their course is diverted;They flow into the desert and vanish.19 The caravans of Teʹma look for them;The travelers from Sheʹba wait for them.20 They are ashamed because of their misplaced trust;They come there only to be disappointed.21 For this is how you have become to me;You have seen the terror of my calamity, and you are afraid.22 Have I said, ‘Give me something,’Or requested that you make a gift for me from your wealth?23 Have I asked to be rescued from the hand of an enemyOr to be saved from oppressors?24 Instruct me, and I will be silent;Help me to understand my mistake.25 Honest words are not painful!But what benefit can be found in your reproof?26 Are you scheming to reprove my words,A desperate man’s sayings, which the wind blows away?27 You would also cast lots over an orphanAnd sell your own friend!28 So now turn and look at me,For I would not lie to your very faces.29 Reconsider, please—do not misjudge me—Yes, reconsider, for my righteousness is yet intact.30 Is my tongue speaking unjustly?Does my palate not discern that something is wrong?
7 “Is not the life of mortal man on earth like compulsory labor,And are not his days like those of a hired worker? 2 Like a slave, he longs for the shadow,And like a hired worker, he waits for his wages. 3 Thus I have been assigned months of futilityAnd nights of misery have been counted out for me. 4 When I lie down I ask, ‘When will I get up?’But as the night drags on, I toss restlessly until the dawning of the day. 5 My flesh is covered with maggots and clods of dirt;My skin is full of scabs and pus. 6 My days go by more quickly than a weaver’s shuttle,And they come to an end without hope. 7 Remember that my life is wind,That my eye will never again see happiness. 8 The eye that sees me now will see me no more;Your eyes will look for me, but I will be gone. 9 Like a cloud that fades and vanishes,The one who goes down to the Grave does not come back up.10 He will not return again to his house,And his place will acknowledge him no more.11 Therefore, I will not restrain my mouth.I will speak in the anguish of my spirit;I will complain in my bitter distress!12 Am I the sea or a sea monster,That you should set a guard over me?13 When I say, ‘My couch will comfort me;My bed will help ease my misery,’14 Then you terrify me with dreamsAnd frighten me with visions,15 So that I would choose suffocation,Yes, death rather than this body of mine.16 I loathe my life; I do not want to go on living.Leave me alone, for my days are like a breath.17 What is mortal man that you should concern yourself with himAnd fix your attention on him?18 Why do you inspect him every morningAnd test him every moment?19 Will you not look away from meAnd leave me alone long enough to swallow my saliva?20 If I have sinned, how could I harm you, the Observer of mankind?Why have you made me your target?Have I become a burden to you?21 Why do you not pardon my transgressionAnd excuse my error?For soon I will lie down in the dust,And you will look for me, but I will be gone.”
8 Bilʹdad the Shuʹhite then said in reply: 2 “How long will you keep speaking like this?The words of your mouth are but a mighty wind! 3 Will God pervert justice,Or will the Almighty pervert righteousness? 4 If your sons sinned against him,He let them be punished for their revolt; 5 But if you would just look to GodAnd plead with the Almighty for favor, 6 And if you were truly pure and upright,He would pay attention to youAnd restore you to your rightful place. 7 And though your beginning was small,Your future would be great. 8 Ask, please, the former generation,And pay attention to the things their fathers found out. 9 For we were born only yesterday, and we know nothing,Because our days on earth are a shadow.10 Will they not instruct youAnd tell you what they know?11 Will a papyrus plant grow tall where there is no marsh?Will a reed grow tall without water?12 While it is still in the bud, not yet plucked off,It will dry up before any other plant.13 This is the outcome of all who forget God,For the hope of the godless will perish,14 Whose confidence is in vainAnd whose trust is as fragile as a spider’s web.15 He will lean against his house, but it will not keep standing;He will try to hold on to it, but it will not last.16 He is a moist plant in the sunlight,And his shoots spread out in the garden.17 In a heap of stones, his roots become entwined;He looks for a house among the stones.18 But when he is uprooted from his place,That place will deny him and say, ‘I have never seen you.’19 Yes, that is how he will disappear;Then others will spring up from the dust.20 Surely God will not reject those who keep integrity;Nor will he support evil men,21 For he will yet fill your mouth with laughterAnd your lips with shouts of joy.22 Those hating you will be clothed with shame,And the tent of wicked ones will be no more.”
9 Job said in reply: 2 “For a fact I know that this is so.But how can mortal man be in the right in a case with God? 3 If someone wishes to argue with Him,That one could not answer one of His questions in a thousand. 4 He is wise in heart and mighty in power.Who can resist him and come off uninjured? 5 He moves mountains without anyone knowing it;He overturns them in his anger. 6 He shakes the earth out of its place,So that its pillars tremble. 7 He commands the sun not to shineAnd seals off the light of the stars; 8 He spreads out the heavens by himself,And he treads upon the high waves of the sea. 9 He made the Ash, the Keʹsil, and the Kiʹmah constellations,And the constellations of the southern sky;10 He does great and unsearchable things,Wonderful things that cannot be counted.11 He passes by me, and I cannot see him;He moves past me, but I do not discern him.12 When he snatches something, who can resist him?Who can say to him, ‘What are you doing?’13 God will not restrain his anger;Even the helpers of Raʹhab will bow down to him.14 How much more when I answer himMust I choose my words carefully to argue with him!15 Even if I were in the right, I would not answer him.I could only plead for mercy from my judge.16 If I call out to him, will he answer me?I do not believe that he will listen to my voice,17 For he crushes me with a stormAnd multiplies my wounds for no reason.18 He does not let me catch my breath;He keeps filling me with bitter things.19 If it is a matter of power, he is the strong one.If it is a matter of justice, he says: ‘Who can call me to account?’20 If I were in the right, my own mouth would condemn me;Even if I keep my integrity, he will declare me guilty.21 Even if I keep my integrity, I am not confident about myself;I reject this life of mine.22 It is all the same. That is why I say,‘He destroys the innocent and the wicked alike.’23 If a flash flood should cause sudden death,He would mock at the despair of the innocent.24 The earth has been handed over to the wicked;He covers the eyes of its judges.If it is not he, then, who is it?25 Now my days are swifter than a runner;They run away without seeing good.26 They glide by like reed boats,Like eagles that swoop down on their prey.27 If I say, ‘I will forget my complaint,I will change my expression and be cheerful,’28 I would still be afraid because of all my pains,And I know you would not find me innocent.29 I would be found guilty.So why should I struggle in vain?30 If I wash myself in water from melting snow,And I cleanse my hands in lye,31 Then you would dip me in a pit,So that even my own garments would detest me.32 For he is not a man like me that I may answer him,That we should go to court together.33 There is no person to decide between us,Who could serve as our judge.34 If he would stop beating meAnd not let his terror frighten me,35 Then I would speak to him unafraid,For it is not in me to speak out of fear.
1 There was a man in the land of Uz whose name was Job. He was an upright man of integrity; he feared God and shunned what was bad. 2 Seven sons and three daughters were born to him. 3 His livestock amounted to 7,000 sheep, 3,000 camels, 1,000 cattle, and 500 donkeys, along with a very large number of servants, so that he became the greatest of all the people of the East.4 Each of his sons would hold a banquet at his house on his own set day. They would invite their three sisters to eat and drink with them. 5 After a series of banquet days was complete, Job would send for them in order to sanctify them. Then he would get up early in the morning and offer up burnt sacrifices for each of them. For Job said: “Maybe my sons have sinned and have cursed God in their heart.” That is what Job would always do.6 Now the day came when the sons of the true God entered to take their station before Jehovah, and Satan also entered among them.7 Then Jehovah said to Satan: “Where have you come from?” Satan answered Jehovah: “From roving about on the earth and from walking about in it.” 8 And Jehovah said to Satan: “Have you taken note of my servant Job? There is no one like him on the earth. He is an upright man of integrity, fearing God and shunning what is bad.” 9 At that Satan answered Jehovah: “Is it for nothing that Job has feared God? 10 Have you not put up a protective hedge around him and his house and everything he has? You have blessed the work of his hands, and his livestock has spread out in the land. 11 But, for a change, stretch out your hand and strike everything he has, and he will surely curse you to your very face.” 12 Then Jehovah said to Satan: “Look! Everything that he has is in your hand. Only do not lay your hand on the man himself!” So Satan went out from the presence of Jehovah.13 Now on the day when his sons and daughters were eating and drinking wine in their oldest brother’s house, 14 a messenger came to Job and said: “The cattle were plowing and the donkeys were grazing beside them 15 when the Sa·beʹans attacked and took them, and they killed the servants with the sword. I am the only one who escaped to tell you.”16 While he was still speaking, another one came and said: “Fire from God fell from the heavens and blazed among the sheep and the servants and consumed them! I am the only one who escaped to tell you.”17 While he was still speaking, another one came and said: “The Chal·deʹans formed three bands and made a raid on the camels and took them, and they killed the servants with the sword. I am the only one who escaped to tell you.”18 While he was still speaking, yet another one came and said: “Your sons and your daughters were eating and drinking wine in their oldest brother’s house. 19 Suddenly a great wind came from the wilderness, and it struck the four corners of the house, so that it fell on the young people and they were killed. I am the only one who escaped to tell you.”20 At that Job got up and ripped apart his garment and cut the hair off his head; then he fell to the ground and bowed down 21 and said:“Naked I came out of my mother’s womb,And naked I will return.Jehovah has given, and Jehovah has taken away.Let the name of Jehovah continue to be praised.”22 In all of this, Job did not sin or accuse God of doing anything wrong.
10 Why, O Jehovah, do you stand at a distance?Why do you hide yourself in times of distress? 2 The wicked one arrogantly pursues the helpless one,But he will be caught in the schemes he devises. 3 For the wicked one boasts about his selfish desiresAnd blesses the greedy one;He disrespects Jehovah. 4 In his haughtiness, the wicked man makes no investigation;All his thoughts are: “There is no God.” 5 His ways keep prospering,But your judgments are beyond his understanding;He scoffs at all his adversaries. 6 He says in his heart: “I will never be shaken;For generation after generationI will never see calamity.” 7 His mouth is full of curses, lies, and threats;Under his tongue are trouble and injury. 8 He waits in ambush near the settlements;From his hiding place he kills an innocent one.His eyes are watching for an unfortunate victim. 9 He waits in his hiding place like a lion in its lair.He waits to seize the helpless one.He seizes the helpless one when he pulls his net shut.10 The victim is crushed and brought down;The unfortunate ones fall into his clutches.11 He says in his heart: “God has forgotten.He has turned away his face.He never notices.”12 Rise up, O Jehovah. O God, lift up your hand.Do not forget the helpless ones.13 Why has the wicked one disrespected God?He says in his heart: “You will not hold me accountable.”14 But you do see trouble and distress.You look on and take matters in hand.To you the unfortunate victim turns;You are the helper for the fatherless child.15 Break the arm of the wicked and evil man,So that when you search for his wickedness,You will find it no more.16 Jehovah is King forever and ever.The nations have perished from the earth.17 But you will hear the request of the meek, O Jehovah.You will make their hearts firm and pay close attention to them.18 You will render justice to the fatherless and to those who are crushed,So that mortal man of the earth may no longer make them afraid.
A melody of thanksgiving.100 Shout in triumph to Jehovah, all the earth. 2 Serve Jehovah with rejoicing.Come into his presence with joyful shouting. 3 Know that Jehovah is God.He is the one who made us, and we belong to him.We are his people and the sheep of his pasture. 4 Come into his gates with thanksgiving,Into his courtyards with praise.Give thanks to him; praise his name. 5 For Jehovah is good;His loyal love endures forever,And his faithfulness through all generations.
Of David. A melody.101 I will sing about loyal love and justice.To you, O Jehovah, I will sing praises. 2 I will act with discretion and blamelessness.When will you come to me?I will walk with integrity of heart inside my house. 3 I will not set anything worthless before my eyes.I hate the deeds of those who deviate from what is right;I will have nothing to do with them. 4 A crooked heart is far from me;I will not accept what is bad. 5 Anyone slandering his neighbor in secret,I will silence.Anyone with haughty eyes and an arrogant heart,I will not tolerate. 6 I will look to the faithful ones of the earth,So that they may dwell with me.The one walking in blamelessness will minister to me. 7 No deceitful person will dwell in my house,And no liar will stand in my presence. 8 Every morning I will silence all the wicked of the earth,To cut off all wrongdoers from the city of Jehovah.
A prayer of the oppressed one when he is in despair and pours out his concern before Jehovah.102 O Jehovah, hear my prayer;Let my cry for help reach you. 2 Do not hide your face from me in my time of distress.Incline your ear to me;Do answer me quickly when I call. 3 For my days are vanishing like smoke,And my bones are charred like a fireplace. 4 My heart has been struck down like grass and has withered,For I forget to eat my food. 5 Because of my loud groaning,My bones cling to my flesh. 6 I resemble the pelican of the wilderness;I am like a little owl among the ruins. 7 I lie awake;I am like a solitary bird on a roof. 8 All day long my enemies taunt me.Those who mock me use my name as a curse. 9 For I eat ashes as my bread,And my drink is mingled with tears,10 Because of your anger and your indignation,For you lifted me up only to cast me aside.11 My days are like a fading shadow,And I am withering like grass.12 But you remain forever, O Jehovah,And your fame will endure for all generations.13 Surely you will rise up and show mercy on Zion,For it is time to show her your favor;The appointed time has come.14 For your servants find pleasure in her stonesAnd have affection even for her dust.15 The nations will fear the name of Jehovah,And all the kings of the earth your glory.16 For Jehovah will rebuild Zion;He will appear in his glory.17 He will pay attention to the prayer of the destitute;He will not despise their prayer.18 This is written for the future generation,So that a people yet to be brought forth will praise Jah.19 For he looks down from his holy height,From the heavens Jehovah views the earth,20 To hear the sighing of the prisoner,To release those sentenced to death,21 So that the name of Jehovah will be declared in ZionAnd his praise in Jerusalem,22 When the peoples and kingdomsGather together to serve Jehovah.23 He prematurely robbed me of my strength;He cut short my days.24 I said: “O my God,Do not do away with me in the middle of my life,You whose years span all generations.25 Long ago you laid the foundations of the earth,And the heavens are the work of your hands.26 They will perish, but you will remain;Just like a garment they will all wear out.Just like clothing you will replace them, and they will pass away.27 But you are the same, and your years will never end.28 The children of your servants will dwell securely,And their offspring will be firmly established before you.”
Of David.103 Let me praise Jehovah;Let everything within me praise his holy name. 2 Let me praise Jehovah;May I never forget all that he has done. 3 He forgives all your errorsAnd heals all your ailments; 4 He reclaims your life from the pitAnd crowns you with his loyal love and mercy. 5 He satisfies you with good things all your life,So that your youth is renewed like that of an eagle. 6 Jehovah acts with righteousness and justiceFor all who are oppressed. 7 He made known his ways to Moses,His deeds to the sons of Israel. 8 Jehovah is merciful and compassionate,Slow to anger and abundant in loyal love. 9 He will not always find fault,Nor will he stay resentful forever.10 He has not dealt with us according to our sins,Nor has he repaid us what our errors deserve.11 For as the heavens are higher than the earth,So great is his loyal love toward those who fear him.12 As far off as the sunrise is from the sunset,So far off from us he has put our transgressions.13 As a father shows mercy to his sons,Jehovah has shown mercy to those who fear him.14 For he well knows how we are formed,Remembering that we are dust.15 As for mortal man, his days are like those of grass;He blooms like a blossom of the field.16 But when a wind blows, it is no more,As though it was never there.17 But the loyal love of Jehovah is for all eternityToward those who fear him,And his righteousness toward their children’s children,18 Toward those who keep his covenantAnd those who are careful to observe his orders.19 Jehovah has firmly established his throne in the heavens;And his kingship rules over everything.20 Praise Jehovah, all you his angels, mighty in power,Who carry out his word, obeying his voice.21 Praise Jehovah, all his armies,His ministers who do his will.22 Praise Jehovah, all his works,In all the places where he rules.Let my whole being praise Jehovah.
104 Let me praise Jehovah.O Jehovah my God, you are very great.With majesty and splendor you are clothed. 2 You are wrapped in light as with a garment;You stretch out the heavens like a tent cloth. 3 He lays beams of his upper rooms in the waters above,Making the clouds his chariot,Moving on the wings of the wind. 4 He makes his angels spirits,His ministers a consuming fire. 5 He has established the earth on its foundations;It will not be moved from its place forever and ever. 6 You covered it with deep waters as with a garment.The waters stood above the mountains. 7 At your rebuke they fled;At the sound of your thunder they ran away in panic 8 —Mountains ascended and valleys descended—To the place you established for them. 9 You set a boundary that they should not pass,That they should never again cover the earth.10 He sends springs into the valleys;Between the mountains they flow.11 They provide water for all the wild beasts of the field;The wild donkeys quench their thirst.12 Above them roost the birds of the sky;They sing among the thick foliage.13 He is watering the mountains from his upper rooms.With the fruitage of your works the earth is satisfied.14 He is making grass grow for the cattleAnd vegetation for mankind’s use,To grow food from the land15 And wine that makes man’s heart rejoice,Oil that makes the face shine,And bread that sustains the heart of mortal man.16 The trees of Jehovah are satisfied,The cedars of Lebʹa·non that he planted,17 Where the birds make nests.The home of the stork is in the juniper trees.18 The high mountains are for the mountain goats;The crags are a refuge for the rock badgers.19 He has made the moon to mark the appointed times;The sun well knows when to set.20 You bring darkness, and night falls,When all the wild animals of the forest roam about.21 The young lions roar for their preyAnd seek their food from God.22 When the sun rises,They withdraw and lie down in their dens.23 Man goes to his work,And he labors until evening.24 How many your works are, O Jehovah!You have made all of them in wisdom.The earth is full of what you have made.25 There is the sea, so great and wide,Teeming with countless living things, both small and great.26 There the ships travel,And Le·viʹa·than, which you formed to play in it.27 All of them wait for youTo give them their food in its season.28 What you give them, they gather.When you open your hand, they are satisfied with good things.29 When you hide your face, they are disturbed.If you take away their spirit, they die and return to the dust.30 If you send out your spirit, they are created,And you renew the surface of the ground.31 The glory of Jehovah will last forever.Jehovah will rejoice in his works.32 He looks at the earth, and it trembles;He touches the mountains, and they smoke.33 I will sing to Jehovah throughout my life;I will sing praises to my God as long as I live.34 Let my thoughts be pleasing to him.I will rejoice in Jehovah.35 The sinners will vanish from the earth,And the wicked will no longer exist.Let me praise Jehovah. Praise Jah!
105 Give thanks to Jehovah, call on his name,Make his deeds known among the peoples! 2 Sing to him, sing praises to him,Ponder over all his wonderful works. 3 Boast about his holy name.Let the hearts of those seeking Jehovah rejoice. 4 Search for Jehovah and his strength.Seek his face constantly. 5 Remember the wonderful works he has performed,His miracles and the judgments he has pronounced, 6 You offspring of Abraham his servant,You sons of Jacob, his chosen ones. 7 He is Jehovah our God.His judgments are throughout the earth. 8 He remembers his covenant forever,The promise he made, to a thousand generations, 9 The covenant he made with Abraham,And the oath he swore to Isaac,10 Which he established as a decree to JacobAnd as a lasting covenant to Israel,11 Saying, “I will give you the land of CaʹnaanAs your allotted inheritance.”12 This was when they were few in number,Yes, very few, and they were foreigners in the land.13 They walked about from nation to nation,From one kingdom to another people.14 He did not allow any man to oppress them,But on their account he reproved kings,15 Saying, “Do not touch my anointed ones,And to my prophets do nothing bad.”16 He called down a famine on the land;He cut off their supply of bread.17 He sent ahead of them a manWho was sold to be a slave, Joseph.18 With fetters they bound his feet,His neck was put in irons;19 Until the time that his word proved true,The saying of Jehovah is what refined him.20 The king sent to release him,The ruler of the peoples set him free.21 He made him master of his household,Ruler over all his property,22 To have authority over his princes as he pleasedAnd to teach his elders wisdom.23 Then Israel came into Egypt,And Jacob lived as a foreigner in the land of Ham.24 God made his people very fruitful;He made them mightier than their adversaries,25 Whose hearts he let change to hate his people,To plot against his servants.26 He sent his servant Moses,And Aaron, whom he had chosen.27 They performed his signs among them,His miracles in the land of Ham.28 He sent darkness and the land became dark;They did not rebel against his words.29 He changed their waters into bloodAnd killed their fish.30 Their land swarmed with frogs,Even in the royal chambers.31 He ordered the gadflies to invadeAnd gnats in all their territories.32 He turned their rain to hailAnd sent lightning on their land.33 He struck their vines and their fig treesAnd shattered the trees of their territory.34 He said that the locusts should invade,Young locusts without number.35 They devoured all the vegetation in the land,And they devoured the produce of the ground.36 Then he struck down every firstborn in their land,The beginning of their procreative power.37 He brought his people out with silver and gold;And no one among his tribes stumbled.38 Egypt rejoiced when they left,For the dread of Israel had fallen on them.39 He spread a cloud to screen them offAnd fire to give light by night.40 They asked, and he brought quail;He kept satisfying them with bread from heaven.41 He opened a rock, and waters flowed out;These flowed through the desert like a river.42 For he remembered the holy promise he had made to Abraham his servant.43 So he brought out his people with exultation,His chosen ones with a joyful cry.44 He gave them the lands of nations;They inherited what other peoples had worked hard to produce,45 So that they would keep his decreesAnd observe his laws.Praise Jah!
106 Praise Jah!Give thanks to Jehovah, for he is good;His loyal love endures forever. 2 Who can fully declare Jehovah’s mighty actsOr proclaim all his praiseworthy deeds? 3 Happy are those who act with justice,Who always do what is right. 4 Remember me, O Jehovah, when you show favor toward your people.Take care of me with your acts of salvation, 5 So that I may enjoy the goodness you show your chosen ones,That I may rejoice along with your nation,That I may proudly praise you along with your inheritance. 6 We have sinned just as our forefathers did;We have done wrong; we have acted wickedly. 7 Our forefathers in Egypt did not appreciate your wonderful works.They did not remember your abundant loyal love,But they rebelled at the sea, by the Red Sea. 8 But he saved them for the sake of his name,To make his mightiness known. 9 He rebuked the Red Sea, and it dried up;He led them through its depths as through a desert;10 He saved them from the hand of their foeAnd reclaimed them from the hand of the enemy.11 The waters covered their adversaries;Not one of them survived.12 Then they had faith in his promise;They began to sing his praise.13 But they quickly forgot what he did;They did not wait for his counsel.14 They gave way to their selfish desires in the wilderness;They tested God in the desert.15 He gave them what they requested,But then struck them with disease that made them waste away.16 In the camp they grew jealous of MosesAnd of Aaron, the holy one of Jehovah.17 The earth then opened up and swallowed DaʹthanAnd covered those assembled with A·biʹram.18 A fire blazed among their group;A flame consumed the wicked.19 They made a calf in HoʹrebAnd bowed down to a statue of metal;20 They exchanged my gloryFor the representation of a grass-eating bull.21 They forgot God their Savior,Who did great things in Egypt,22 Wonderful works in the land of Ham,Awe-inspiring deeds at the Red Sea.23 He was about to order their annihilation,But Moses his chosen one interceded with himTo avert his destructive anger.24 Then they despised the desirable land;They had no faith in his promise.25 They kept grumbling in their tents;They did not listen to the voice of Jehovah.26 So he raised his hand in an oath concerning themThat he would make them fall in the wilderness;27 He would make their descendants fall among the nations,And he would scatter them throughout the lands.28 Then they joined in worship of Baʹal of Peʹor,And they ate sacrifices offered to the dead.29 They provoked Him by their actions,And a scourge broke out among them.30 But when Phinʹe·has stood up and intervened,The scourge was halted.31 And it was counted to him as righteousnessThrough all generations forever.32 They provoked Him at the waters of Merʹi·bah,And it went badly for Moses because of them.33 They embittered his spirit,And he spoke rashly with his lips.34 They did not annihilate the peoples,As Jehovah had commanded them.35 But they mingled with the nationsAnd adopted their ways.36 They kept serving their idols,And these became a snare to them.37 They would sacrifice their sonsAnd their daughters to demons.38 They kept spilling innocent blood,The blood of their own sons and daughtersWhom they sacrificed to the idols of Caʹnaan;And the land was polluted with bloodshed.39 They became unclean by their works;They committed spiritual prostitution by their deeds.40 So the anger of Jehovah blazed against his people,And he grew to detest his inheritance.41 He repeatedly handed them over to the nations,So that those who hated them might rule over them.42 Their enemies oppressed them,And they were subject to their power.43 Many times he rescued them,But they would rebel and disobey,And they would be brought low for their error.44 But he would see their distressAnd hear their cry for help.45 For their sake he would remember his covenant,And he would feel pity, moved by his great loyal love.46 He would cause them to be pitiedBy all who held them captive.47 Save us, O Jehovah our God,And gather us from the nationsSo that we may give thanks to your holy nameAnd exult in praising you.48 May Jehovah, the God of Israel, be praisedThroughout all eternity.And let all the people say, “Amen!”Praise Jah!
BOOK FIVE(Psalms 107-150)107 Give thanks to Jehovah, for he is good;His loyal love endures forever. 2 Let those reclaimed by Jehovah say this,Those whom he reclaimed from the hand of the adversary, 3 Whom he gathered together from the lands,From the east and from the west,From the north and from the south. 4 They wandered about in the wilderness, in the desert;They did not find a way to a city where they could live. 5 They were hungry and thirsty;They were faint from exhaustion. 6 They kept crying out to Jehovah in their distress;He rescued them from their plight. 7 He had them walk in the right wayTo come to a city where they could live. 8 Let people give thanks to Jehovah for his loyal loveAnd for his wonderful works in behalf of the sons of men. 9 For he has satisfied the thirstyAnd filled the hungry with good things.10 Some were living in deepest darkness,Prisoners in affliction and in irons.11 For they had rebelled against the word of God;They disrespected the counsel of the Most High.12 So he humbled their hearts through hardship;They stumbled, and there was no one to help them.13 They called to Jehovah for help in their distress;He saved them from their plight.14 He brought them out of deepest darkness,And he tore off their shackles.15 Let people give thanks to Jehovah for his loyal loveAnd for his wonderful works in behalf of the sons of men.16 For he has broken down the doors of copperAnd cut through the bars of iron.17 They were foolish and suffered afflictionOn account of their transgressions and their errors.18 They lost their appetite for all food;They drew near the gates of death.19 They would call to Jehovah for help in their distress;He would save them from their plight.20 He would send his word and heal themAnd rescue them from the pits they were trapped in.21 Let people give thanks to Jehovah for his loyal loveAnd for his wonderful works in behalf of the sons of men.22 Let them offer the sacrifices of thanksgivingAnd declare his works with a joyful cry.23 Those who travel on the sea in ships,Who ply their trade over the vast waters,24 They have seen the works of JehovahAnd his wonderful works in the deep;25 How by his word a windstorm arises,Lifting up the waves of the sea.26 They rise up to the sky;They plunge down to the depths.Their courage melts away because of the impending calamity.27 They reel and stagger like a drunken man,And all their skill proves useless.28 Then they cry out to Jehovah in their distress,And he rescues them from their plight.29 He calms the windstorm;The waves of the sea grow quiet.30 They rejoice when these grow still,And he leads them to their desired harbor.31 Let people give thanks to Jehovah for his loyal loveAnd for his wonderful works in behalf of the sons of men.32 Let them exalt him in the congregation of the people,And let them praise him in the council of the elders.33 He turns rivers into a desertAnd springs of water into parched ground,34 Fruitful land into salty wasteland,Because of the wickedness of those dwelling in it.35 He turns the desert into reedy pools of water,And dry land into springs of water.36 He causes the hungry to dwell there,So that they may establish a city where they can live.37 They sow fields and plant vineyardsThat yield fruitful crops.38 He blesses them and they increase greatly;He does not let their cattle diminish.39 But again they become few and are humiliatedBecause of oppression, calamity, and grief.40 He pours out contempt upon noblesAnd makes them wander in trackless wastelands.41 But he protects the poor from oppressionAnd makes their families as numerous as a flock.42 The upright see this and rejoice;But all the unrighteous shut their mouths.43 Whoever is wise will observe these thingsAnd will carefully consider Jehovah’s acts of loyal love.
A song. A melody of David.108 My heart is steadfast, O God.I will sing and make music with my whole being. 2 Do awake, O stringed instrument; you too, O harp.I will awaken the dawn. 3 I will praise you among the peoples, O Jehovah,And I will sing praises to you among the nations. 4 For your loyal love is great, as high as the heavens,And your faithfulness, up to the skies. 5 Be exalted above the heavens, O God;May your glory be over all the earth. 6 So that your loved ones may be rescued,Save us with your right hand and answer me. 7 God has spoken in his holiness:“I will exult, I will give out Sheʹchem as an inheritance,And I will measure off the Valley of Sucʹcoth. 8 Gilʹe·ad belongs to me, as does Ma·nasʹseh,And Eʹphra·im is the helmet for my head;Judah is my commander’s staff. 9 Moʹab is my washbasin.Over Eʹdom I will throw my sandal.Over Phi·lisʹti·a I will shout in triumph.”10 Who will bring me to the fortified city?Who will lead me as far as Eʹdom?11 Is it not you, O God, who have rejected us,Our God, who no longer goes out with our armies?12 Help us in our distress,For salvation by humans is worthless.13 By God we will gain power,And he will trample on our adversaries.
To the director. Of David. A melody.109 O God whom I praise, do not remain silent. 2 For the wicked and the deceitful open their mouths against me.They speak about me with lying tongues; 3 They surround me with hateful words,And they attack me without cause. 4 They resist me in response to my love;But I continue to pray. 5 They repay me with bad for goodAnd hatred for my love. 6 Appoint a wicked man over him;May a resister stand at his right hand. 7 When he is judged, may he be found guilty;May even his prayer be counted as a sin. 8 Let his days be few;His office of oversight let someone else take. 9 Let his children become fatherless,And his wife, a widow.10 May his children become wandering beggars,Foraging for food from their ruined homes.11 May his creditor seize all that he has,And may strangers plunder his possessions.12 May no one extend kindness to him,And may no one show favor to his fatherless children.13 Let his descendants be cut off;May their name be erased within a generation.14 Let the error of his forefathers be remembered by Jehovah,And may the sin of his mother not be erased.15 May Jehovah always be mindful of what they have done;And may he cut off the memory of them from the earth.16 For he did not remember to show kindness,But he kept pursuing the oppressed, poor, and brokenhearted manTo put him to death.17 He loved to pronounce a curse, so that is what came upon him;He had no desire to bless, so he received no blessing.18 He was clothed with curses as his garment.And they were poured into his body like water,Into his bones like oil.19 May his curses be like the clothing in which he wraps himselfAnd like a belt he always wears.20 This is the payment from Jehovah for the one who resists meAnd for those who speak evil things against me.21 But you, Jehovah the Sovereign Lord,Act in my behalf for the sake of your name.Rescue me, because your loyal love is good.22 For I am helpless and poor,And my heart has been pierced within me.23 I am passing away like a fading shadow;I have been shaken off like a locust.24 My knees give way from fasting;My body is thin, and I am wasting away.25 I have become the object of their taunts.When they see me, they shake their heads.26 Help me, O Jehovah my God;Save me by your loyal love.27 May they know that this is by your hand;That you, O Jehovah, have done it.28 Let them pronounce a curse, but may you give a blessing.When they rise up against me, may they be put to shame,But let your servant rejoice.29 Let those who resist me be clothed with humiliation;May they be wrapped in their shame as in a robe.30 My mouth will fervently praise Jehovah;I will praise him in front of many people.31 For he will stand at the right hand of the poorTo save him from those who condemn him.
To the director. Of David.11 In Jehovah I have taken refuge.So how can you say to me:“Flee like a bird to your mountain! 2 See how the wicked bend the bow;They set their arrow on the bowstring,To shoot from the darkness those upright in heart. 3 When the foundations are torn down,What can the righteous do?” 4 Jehovah is in his holy temple.Jehovah’s throne is in the heavens.His own eyes see, his watchful eyes examine the sons of men. 5 Jehovah examines the righteous one as well as the wicked one;He hates anyone who loves violence. 6 Upon the wicked, he will rain down snares;Fire and sulfur and a scorching wind will be the portion of their cup. 7 For Jehovah is righteous; he loves righteous acts.The upright will see his face.
Of David. A melody.110 Jehovah declared to my Lord:“Sit at my right handUntil I place your enemies as a stool for your feet.” 2 Jehovah will extend the scepter of your power out of Zion, saying:“Go subduing in the midst of your enemies.” 3 Your people will offer themselves willingly on the day of your military force.In splendid holiness, from the womb of the dawn,You have your company of young men just like dewdrops. 4 Jehovah has sworn an oath, and he will not change his mind:“You are a priest foreverIn the manner of Mel·chizʹe·dek!” 5 Jehovah will be at your right hand;He will crush kings on the day of his anger. 6 He will execute judgment against the nations;He will fill the land with dead bodies.He will crush the leader of a vast land. 7 He will drink from the stream along the road.Therefore, he will hold his head high.
111 Praise Jah!I will praise Jehovah with all my heartIn the assembled group of upright ones and in the congregation. 2 The works of Jehovah are great;They are studied by all those finding pleasure in them. 3 His activity is glorious and splendid,And his righteousness endures forever. 4 He causes his wonderful works to be remembered.Jehovah is compassionate and merciful. 5 Food he gives to those fearing him.He remembers his covenant forever. 6 He has revealed to his people his powerful worksBy giving them the inheritance of the nations. 7 The works of his hands are truth and justice;Trustworthy are all his orders. 8 They are always reliable, now and forever;They are made in truth and righteousness. 9 He has given redemption to his people.He commanded that his covenant should last forever.His name is holy and awe-inspiring.10 The fear of Jehovah is the beginning of wisdom.All those observing his orders show good insight.His praise endures forever.
112 Praise Jah!Happy is the man who fears Jehovah,Who takes great pleasure in his commandments. 2 His descendants will be mighty in the earth,And the generation of the upright will be blessed. 3 Wealth and riches are in his house,And his righteousness continues forever. 4 To the upright he shines like a light in the darkness.He is compassionate and merciful and righteous. 5 It goes well for the man who generously lends.He conducts his affairs with justice. 6 He will never be shaken.The righteous will be remembered forever. 7 He will not fear bad news.His heart is steadfast, trusting in Jehovah. 8 His heart is unshakable; he is not afraid;In the end he will look in triumph on his adversaries. 9 He has distributed widely; he has given to the poor.His righteousness continues forever.His own strength will be exalted with glory.10 The wicked one will see and be upset.He will grind his teeth and melt away.The desires of the wicked will perish.
113 Praise Jah!Offer praise, you servants of Jehovah,Praise the name of Jehovah. 2 May Jehovah’s name be praisedFrom now on and forever. 3 From the rising of the sun to its setting,Let Jehovah’s name be praised. 4 Jehovah is high above all the nations;His glory is above the heavens. 5 Who is like Jehovah our God,The one who dwells on high? 6 He stoops down to look on heaven and earth, 7 Raising the lowly from the dust.He lifts up the poor from the ash heap 8 In order to make him sit with nobles,With the nobles of his people. 9 He gives the barren woman a homeAs a happy mother with children.Praise Jah!
114 When Israel went out of Egypt,The house of Jacob from a people speaking a foreign language, 2 Judah became his sanctuary,Israel, his dominion. 3 The sea saw it and fled;The Jordan turned back. 4 The mountains skipped about like rams,The hills, like lambs. 5 What made you flee, O sea?Why, O Jordan, did you turn back? 6 Why did you skip about like rams, O mountains,Like lambs, O hills? 7 Tremble, O earth, because of the Lord,Because of the God of Jacob, 8 Who turns the rock into a reedy pool of water,The flinty rock into springs of water.
115 Not to us, O Jehovah, not to us,But to your name give gloryBecause of your loyal love and your faithfulness. 2 Why should the nations say:“Where is their God?” 3 Our God is in the heavens;He does whatever he pleases. 4 Their idols are silver and gold,The work of human hands. 5 A mouth they have, but they cannot speak;Eyes, but they cannot see; 6 Ears they have, but they cannot hear;A nose, but they cannot smell; 7 Hands they have, but they cannot feel;Feet, but they cannot walk;They make no sound with their throat. 8 The people who make them will become just like them,As will all those who trust in them. 9 O Israel, trust in Jehovah—He is their help and their shield.10 O house of Aaron, trust in Jehovah—He is their help and their shield.11 You who fear Jehovah, trust in Jehovah—He is their help and their shield.12 Jehovah remembers us and will bless;He will bless the house of Israel;He will bless the house of Aaron.13 He will bless those who fear Jehovah,The small as well as the great.14 Jehovah will give you an increase,To you and your children.15 May you be blessed by Jehovah,The Maker of heaven and earth.16 As for the heavens, they belong to Jehovah,But the earth he has given to the sons of men.17 The dead do not praise Jah;Nor do any who go down into the silence of death.18 But we will praise JahFrom now on and forever.Praise Jah!
116 I love JehovahBecause he hears my voice, my pleas for help. 2 For he inclines his ear to me,And I will call on him as long as I live. 3 The ropes of death encircled me;The Grave had me in its grip.I was overcome by distress and grief. 4 But I called on the name of Jehovah:“O Jehovah, rescue me!” 5 Jehovah is compassionate and righteous;Our God is merciful. 6 Jehovah is guarding the inexperienced.I was brought low, and he saved me. 7 Let my soul rest once again,For Jehovah has dealt kindly with me. 8 You have rescued me from death,My eye from tears, my foot from stumbling. 9 I will walk before Jehovah in the land of the living.10 I had faith, for I spoke;I was greatly afflicted.11 As for me, I panicked and said:“Every man is a liar.”12 With what will I repay JehovahFor all the good he has done for me?13 I will take up the cup of salvation,And I will call on the name of Jehovah.14 I will pay my vows to JehovahIn the presence of all his people.15 Costly in the eyes of JehovahIs the death of his loyal ones.16 I beg you, O Jehovah,For I am your servant.I am your servant, the son of your slave girl.You have freed me from my bonds.17 I will offer to you the sacrifice of thanksgiving;I will call on the name of Jehovah.18 I will pay my vows to JehovahIn the presence of all his people,19 In the courtyards of the house of Jehovah,In your midst, O Jerusalem.Praise Jah!
117 Praise Jehovah, all you nations;Glorify him, all you peoples. 2 For his loyal love toward us is great;The faithfulness of Jehovah endures forever.Praise Jah!
118 Give thanks to Jehovah, for he is good;His loyal love endures forever. 2 Let Israel now say:“His loyal love endures forever.” 3 Let those of the house of Aaron now say:“His loyal love endures forever.” 4 Let those fearing Jehovah now say:“His loyal love endures forever.” 5 I called on Jah in my distress;Jah answered and brought me into a place of safety. 6 Jehovah is on my side; I will not be afraid.What can man do to me? 7 Jehovah is on my side as my helper;I will look in triumph on those who hate me. 8 It is better to take refuge in JehovahThan to trust in humans. 9 It is better to take refuge in JehovahThan to trust in princes.10 All the nations surrounded me,But in the name of Jehovah,I warded them off.11 They surrounded me, yes, I was completely surrounded,But in the name of Jehovah,I warded them off.12 They surrounded me like bees,But they were extinguished as quickly as a fire among thorns.In the name of Jehovah,I warded them off.13 I was pushed hard to make me fall,But Jehovah helped me.14 Jah is my shelter and my strength,And he has become my salvation.15 The sound of rejoicing and salvationIs in the tents of the righteous.The right hand of Jehovah is demonstrating its power.16 The right hand of Jehovah is exalting itself;The right hand of Jehovah is demonstrating its power.17 I will not die, no, I will live,In order to declare the works of Jah.18 Jah disciplined me severely,But he did not hand me over to death.19 Open to me the gates of righteousness;I will enter them and praise Jah.20 This is the gate of Jehovah.The righteous will enter through it.21 I will praise you, for you answered meAnd you became my salvation.22 The stone that the builders rejectedHas become the chief cornerstone.23 This has come from Jehovah;It is wonderful in our eyes.24 This is the day that Jehovah has made;We will be joyful and rejoice in it.25 Jehovah, save us, please, we beg!Jehovah, grant us victory, please!26 Blessed is the one who comes in the name of Jehovah;We bless you from the house of Jehovah.27 Jehovah is God;He gives us light.Join in the festival procession with branches in hand,Up to the horns of the altar.28 You are my God, and I will praise you;My God, I will exalt you.29 Give thanks to Jehovah, for he is good;His loyal love endures forever.
119 Happy are those who are blameless in their way,Who walk in the law of Jehovah. 2 Happy are those who observe his reminders,Who search for him with all their heart. 3 They practice no unrighteousness;They walk in his ways. 4 You have commandedThat your orders be carefully kept. 5 If only I could remain steadfastSo as to observe your regulations! 6 Then I would not be put to shameWhen I consider all your commandments. 7 I will praise you with an upright heartWhen I learn your righteous judgments. 8 I will observe your regulations.May you never utterly forsake me. 9 How can a young man keep his path clean?By keeping on guard according to your word.10 With my whole heart I seek you.Do not let me stray from your commandments.11 In my heart I treasure up your sayingSo that I may not sin against you.12 May you be praised, O Jehovah;Teach me your regulations.13 With my lips I declareAll the judgments that you have spoken.14 I rejoice over your remindersMore than over all other valuable things.15 I will ponder over your ordersAnd keep my eyes on your paths.16 I am fond of your statutes.I will not forget your word.17 Deal kindly with your servant,So that I may live and observe your word.18 Open my eyes so that I may see clearlyThe wonderful things from your law.19 I am but a foreigner in the land.Do not hide your commandments from me.20 I am consumed with longingFor your judgments at all times.21 You rebuke the presumptuous,The cursed ones who stray from your commandments.22 Remove from me scorn and contempt,For I have observed your reminders.23 Even when princes sit together and speak against me,Your servant ponders over your regulations.24 I am fond of your reminders;They are my advisers.25 I lie prostrate in the dust.Preserve me alive according to your word.26 I told you of my ways, and you answered me;Teach me your regulations.27 Make me understand the meaning of your orders,So that I may ponder over your wonderful works.28 I have been sleepless from grief.Strengthen me according to your word.29 Remove from me the way of deception,And favor me with your law.30 The way of faithfulness I have chosen.I recognize that your judgments are right.31 I cling to your reminders.O Jehovah, do not let me be disappointed.32 I will eagerly pursue the way of your commandmentsBecause you make room for it in my heart.33 Teach me, O Jehovah, the way of your regulations,And I will follow it to the end.34 Give me understanding,So that I may observe your lawAnd keep it with my whole heart.35 Guide me in the pathway of your commandments,For in it I take delight.36 Incline my heart to your reminders,Not to selfish gain.37 Turn my eyes away from looking at what is worthless;Preserve me alive in your way.38 Fulfill your promise to your servant,So that you may be feared.39 Remove the disgrace that I dread,For your judgments are good.40 See how I long for your orders.Preserve me alive in your righteousness.41 May I experience your loyal love, O Jehovah,Your salvation in harmony with your promise;42 Then I will reply to the one taunting me,For I put my trust in your word.43 Do not utterly remove the word of truth from my mouth,For I have hoped in your judgment.44 I will keep your law constantly,Forever and ever.45 And I will walk about in a place of safety,For I search for your orders.46 I will speak about your reminders in front of kings,And I will not be ashamed.47 I am fond of your commandments,Yes, I love them.48 I will raise my hands to your commandments, which I love,And I will ponder over your regulations.49 Remember your word to your servant,Through which you give me hope.50 This is my comfort in my affliction,For your saying has preserved me alive.51 The presumptuous utterly scorn me,But I do not deviate from your law.52 I remember your judgments from of old, O Jehovah,And I find comfort in them.53 I am seized with burning rage because of the wicked,Who forsake your law.54 Your regulations are songs to meWherever I dwell.55 During the night I remember your name, O Jehovah,So that I may keep your law.56 This has been my practiceBecause I have observed your orders.57 Jehovah is my portion;I have promised to keep your words.58 I appeal to you with all my heart;Show me favor according to your promise.59 I have examined my ways,In order to turn my feet back to your reminders.60 I hurry and do not delayTo keep your commandments.61 The ropes of the wicked surround me,But your law I do not forget.62 At midnight I get up to give you thanksFor your righteous judgments.63 I am a friend of all who fear youAnd of those who keep your orders.64 Your loyal love, O Jehovah, fills the earth;Teach me your regulations.65 You have dealt well with your servant,O Jehovah, according to your word.66 Teach me good sense and knowledge,For I have put my trust in your commandments.67 Before I was afflicted, I used to go astray,But now I keep your saying.68 You are good and your works are good.Teach me your regulations.69 The presumptuous smear me with lies,But I observe your orders with all my heart.70 Their heart is insensitive,But I am fond of your law.71 It is good that I have been afflicted,So that I may learn your regulations.72 The law that you have proclaimed is good for me,More so than thousands of pieces of gold and silver.73 Your hands made me and formed me.Give me understanding,So that I may learn your commandments.74 Those who fear you see me and rejoice,For your word is my hope.75 I know, O Jehovah, that your judgments are righteousAnd that you have afflicted me in your faithfulness.76 May your loyal love please comfort me,According to the promise you made to your servant.77 Show me mercy, so that I may keep living,For I am fond of your law.78 May the presumptuous be put to shame,For they wrong me without cause.But I will ponder over your orders.79 Let those who fear you return to me,Those who know your reminders.80 May my heart be blameless in following your regulations,So that I may not be put to shame.81 I long for your salvation,For your word is my hope.82 My eyes long for your sayingWhile I say: “When will you comfort me?”83 For I am like a skin bottle dried up in the smoke,But your regulations I do not forget.84 How many days must your servant wait?When will you bring judgment against those persecuting me?85 The presumptuous dig pits for me,Those who defy your law.86 All your commandments are trustworthy.Men persecute me without cause; help me!87 They almost exterminated me from the earth,But I did not abandon your orders.88 Preserve me alive because of your loyal love,So that I may keep the reminders you have spoken.89 Forever, O Jehovah,Your word will remain in the heavens.90 Your faithfulness is through all generations.You have firmly established the earth, so that it continues to stand.91 By your judgments they remain until today,For they are all your servants.92 If I had not been fond of your law,I would have perished in my affliction.93 I will never forget your orders,Because by them you have preserved me alive.94 I belong to you; save me,Because I have searched for your orders.95 The wicked wait to destroy me,But I give close attention to your reminders.96 I have seen a limit to all perfection,But your commandment has no limit.97 How I do love your law!I ponder over it all day long.98 Your commandment makes me wiser than my enemies,Because it is with me forever.99 I have more insight than all my teachers,Because I ponder over your reminders.100 I act with more understanding than older men,Because I observe your orders.101 I refuse to walk on any evil path,So that I may keep your word.102 I do not turn aside from your judgments,For you have instructed me.103 How sweet your sayings are to my palate,More so than honey to my mouth!104 By your orders I act with understanding.That is why I hate every false path.105 Your word is a lamp to my foot,And a light for my path.106 I have sworn an oath, and I will carry it out,To observe your righteous judgments.107 I have been greatly afflicted.O Jehovah, preserve me alive according to your word.108 Please take pleasure in my voluntary offerings of praise, O Jehovah,And teach me your judgments.109 My life is in constant danger,But I have not forgotten your law.110 The wicked have set a trap for me,But I have not strayed from your orders.111 I take your reminders as my permanent possession,For they are the joy of my heart.112 I have resolved to obey your regulationsAt all times, down to the last.113 I hate the halfhearted ones,But I love your law.114 You are my shelter and my shield,For your word is my hope.115 Stay away from me, you evil men,So that I may observe the commandments of my God.116 Support me as you promised,So that I may keep living;Do not let my hope turn into disappointment.117 Support me that I may be saved;Then I will always concentrate on your regulations.118 You reject all those who stray from your regulations,For they are false and deceitful.119 You discard all the wicked of the earth as if they were worthless dross.That is why I love your reminders.120 The dread of you makes my body tremble;I am in fear of your judgments.121 I have done what is just and righteous.Do not abandon me to my oppressors!122 Guarantee the welfare of your servant;May the presumptuous not oppress me.123 My eyes have grown weary waiting for your salvationAnd for your righteous promise.124 Show your loyal love to your servant,And teach me your regulations.125 I am your servant; give me understanding,So that I may know your reminders.126 The time has come for Jehovah to act,For they have broken your law.127 That is why I love your commandmentsMore than gold, even fine gold.128 Therefore, I consider every instruction from you to be right;I hate every false path.129 Your reminders are wonderful.That is why I observe them.130 The disclosure of your words brings light,Giving understanding to the inexperienced.131 I open my mouth wide and sigh,Because I long for your commandments.132 Turn to me and show me favor,In keeping with your judgment toward those loving your name.133 Guide my steps safely by your saying;May nothing wicked dominate me.134 Rescue me from oppressive men,And I will keep your orders.135 Make your face shine upon your servant,And teach me your regulations.136 Tears stream down from my eyesBecause people do not keep your law.137 You are righteous, O Jehovah,And your judgments are fair.138 The reminders you give are righteousAnd completely reliable.139 My zeal consumes me,Because my adversaries have forgotten your words.140 Your saying is thoroughly refined,And your servant loves it.141 I am insignificant and despised;Yet, I have not forgotten your orders.142 Your righteousness is an eternal righteousness,And your law is truth.143 Though distress and difficulty come upon me,I remain fond of your commandments.144 The righteousness of your reminders is eternal.Give me understanding, so that I may keep living.145 I call with my whole heart. Answer me, O Jehovah.Your regulations I will observe.146 I call on you; save me!I will keep your reminders.147 I have been awake before dawn to cry for help,For your words are my hope.148 My eyes open before the night watches,So that I can ponder over your saying.149 Do listen to my voice because of your loyal love.O Jehovah, preserve me alive according to your justice.150 Those who engage in shameful conduct come near;They are far away from your law.151 You are near, O Jehovah,And all your commandments are truth.152 Long ago I learned about your reminders,That you have established them to last forever.153 Look on my affliction and rescue me,For I have not forgotten your law.154 Defend me and rescue me;Preserve me alive in harmony with your promise.155 Salvation is far away from the wicked,For they have not searched for your regulations.156 Your mercy is great, O Jehovah.Preserve me alive in harmony with your justice.157 My persecutors and my adversaries are many;But I have not deviated from your reminders.158 I look on the treacherous with loathing,Because they do not keep your saying.159 See how I love your orders!O Jehovah, preserve me alive because of your loyal love.160 The very essence of your word is truth,And all your righteous judgments endure forever. o161 Princes persecute me for no cause,But my heart stands in awe of your words.162 I rejoice over your sayingLike someone who finds great spoil.163 I hate falsehood—I detest it—I love your law.164 Seven times a day I praise youBecause of your righteous judgments.165 Abundant peace belongs to those who love your law;Nothing can make them stumble.166 I hope for your acts of salvation, O Jehovah,And I observe your commandments.167 I keep your reminders,And I love them dearly.168 I observe your orders and your reminders,For you are aware of all that I do.169 May my cry for help reach you, O Jehovah.According to your word, make me understand.170 May my request for favor come before you.Save me, as you have promised.171 May my lips overflow with praise,For you teach me your regulations.172 May my tongue sing about your saying,For all your commandments are righteous.173 May your hand be ready to help me,Because I choose to obey your orders.174 I long for your salvation, O Jehovah,And I am fond of your law.175 Let me live so that I may praise you;May your judgments be my help.176 I have strayed like a lost sheep. Search for your servant,For I have not forgotten your commandments.
To the director; tuned to Shemʹi·nith. A melody of David.12 Save me, O Jehovah, for the loyal one is no more;Faithful people have vanished from among men. 2 They speak lies to one another;They flatter with their lips and speak with deceitful hearts. 3 Jehovah will cut off all flattering lipsAnd the tongue that makes great boasts, 4 Those who say: “We will prevail with our tongues.We use our lips as we please;Who will be our master?” 5 “Because the afflicted are oppressed,Because of the sighing of the poor,I will rise up to act,” says Jehovah.“I will save them from those who treat them with contempt.” 6 The sayings of Jehovah are pure;They are like silver refined in an earthen furnace, purified seven times. 7 You will guard them, O Jehovah;You will protect each one of them from this generation forever. 8 The wicked walk around unrestrainedBecause the sons of men promote depravity.
A Song of the Ascents.120 I called to Jehovah in my distress,And he answered me. 2 O Jehovah, rescue me from lying lipsAnd from the deceitful tongue. 3 What will He do to you, and how will He punish you,You deceitful tongue? 4 With sharp arrows of a warriorAnd burning coals of broomwood. 5 Woe to me, for I have lived as a foreigner in Meʹshech!I have been dwelling among the tents of Keʹdar. 6 I have been dwelling far too longWith those who hate peace. 7 I am for peace, but when I speak,They are for war.
A Song of the Ascents.121 I raise my eyes to the mountains.From where will my help come? 2 My help comes from Jehovah,The Maker of heaven and earth. 3 He will never allow your foot to slip.The One guarding you will never be drowsy. 4 Look! He will never be drowsy nor go to sleep,The One guarding Israel. 5 Jehovah is guarding you.Jehovah is the shade at your right hand. 6 By day the sun will not strike you,Nor the moon by night. 7 Jehovah will guard you against all harm.He will guard your life. 8 Jehovah will guard you in all you doFrom now on and forever.
A Song of the Ascents. Of David.122 I rejoiced when they said to me:“Let us go to the house of Jehovah.” 2 And now our feet are standingWithin your gates, O Jerusalem. 3 Jerusalem is built as a cityThat is joined together as one. 4 The tribes have gone up to it,The tribes of Jah,According to the reminder to Israel,To give thanks to the name of Jehovah. 5 For thrones for judgment were set up there,Thrones of the house of David. 6 Ask for the peace of Jerusalem.Those who love you, O city, will be secure. 7 May peace continue within your ramparts,Security within your fortified towers. 8 For the sake of my brothers and my companions I will say:“May there be peace within you.” 9 For the sake of the house of Jehovah our God,I will seek good for you.
A Song of the Ascents.123 To you I raise my eyes,You who are enthroned in the heavens. 2 As the eyes of servants look to the hand of their master,And the eyes of a servant girl to the hand of her mistress,So our eyes look to Jehovah our GodUntil he shows us favor. 3 Show us favor, O Jehovah, show us favor,For we have had our full share of contempt. 4 We have had our full share of ridicule from the self-assuredAnd the contempt of the arrogant.
A Song of the Ascents. Of David.124 “If Jehovah had not been with us”—Let Israel now say— 2 “If Jehovah had not been with usWhen men rose up to attack us, 3 Then they would have swallowed us up aliveWhen their anger was burning against us. 4 Then the waters would have washed us away,The torrent would have swept over us. 5 The raging waters would have overwhelmed us. 6 May Jehovah be praised,For he has not given us as prey to their teeth. 7 We are like a bird that escapedFrom the hunter’s trap;The trap was broken,And we escaped. 8 Our help is in the name of Jehovah,The Maker of heaven and earth.”
A Song of the Ascents.125 Those who trust in JehovahAre like Mount Zion, which cannot be shakenBut endures forever. 2 Just as mountains surround Jerusalem,So Jehovah surrounds his peopleFrom now on and forever. 3 The scepter of wickedness will not remain upon the land allotted to the righteous,So that the righteous do not turn to doing what is wrong. 4 Do good, O Jehovah, to those who are good,To those who are upright in heart. 5 As for those who turn aside to their crooked ways,Jehovah will remove them along with the wrongdoers.May there be peace upon Israel.
A Song of the Ascents.126 When Jehovah gathered back the captives of Zion,We thought we were dreaming. 2 At that time our mouth was filled with laughterAnd our tongue with a joyful shout.At that time they said among the nations:“Jehovah has done great things for them.” 3 Jehovah has done great things for us,And we are overjoyed. 4 Do gather back our captives, O Jehovah,Like streams in the Negʹeb. 5 Those sowing seed with tearsWill reap with a joyful shout. 6 The one who does go out, though weeping,Carrying his bag of seed,Will surely return with a joyful shout,Carrying in his sheaves.
A Song of the Ascents. Of Solomon.127 Unless Jehovah builds the house,It is in vain that its builders work hard on it.Unless Jehovah guards the city,It is in vain that the guard stays awake. 2 It is in vain that you rise up early,That you stay up late,That you toil for your food,Since he provides for his loved ones while giving them sleep. 3 Look! Sons are an inheritance from Jehovah;The fruit of the womb is a reward. 4 Like arrows in the hand of a mighty man,So are the sons of one’s youth. 5 Happy is the man who fills his quiver with them.They will not be put to shame,For they will speak with enemies in the city gate.
A Song of the Ascents.128 Happy is everyone who fears Jehovah,Who walks in His ways. 2 You will eat what your hands worked hard to produce.You will be happy and will enjoy prosperity. 3 Your wife will be like a fruitful vine within your house;Your sons will be like shoots of an olive tree around your table. 4 Look! That is how the man who fears JehovahWill be blessed. 5 Jehovah will bless you from Zion.May you see Jerusalem prosper all the days of your life 6 And see the sons of your sons.May there be peace upon Israel.
A Song of the Ascents.129 “Since my youth they have constantly attacked me”—Let Israel now say— 2 “Since my youth they have constantly attacked me;But they have not defeated me. 3 Plowmen have plowed across my back;They have made their furrows long.” 4 But Jehovah is righteous;He has cut up the ropes of the wicked. 5 They will be put to shame and will retreat in disgrace,All those who hate Zion. 6 They will become like grass on the rooftopsThat withers before it is pulled up, 7 That cannot fill the reaper’s handNor the arms of the one gathering sheaves. 8 Those passing by will not say:“May the blessing of Jehovah be upon you;We bless you in the name of Jehovah.”
To the director. A melody of David.13 How long, O Jehovah, will you forget me? Forever?How long will you hide your face from me? 2 How long will I have anxious concern,With grief in my heart each day?How long will my enemy triumph over me? 3 Look upon me and answer me, O Jehovah my God.Give light to my eyes, so that I may not fall asleep in death, 4 So that my enemy will not say: “I have defeated him!”Do not let my opponents rejoice over my downfall. 5 As for me, I trust in your loyal love;My heart will rejoice in your acts of salvation. 6 I will sing to Jehovah, for he has richly rewarded me.
A Song of the Ascents.130 From the depths I call to you, O Jehovah. 2 O Jehovah, hear my voice.May your ears pay attention to my pleas for help. 3 If errors were what you watch, O Jah,Then who, O Jehovah, could stand? 4 For with you there is true forgiveness,So that you may be held in awe. 5 I hope in Jehovah, my whole being hopes in him;I wait for his word. 6 I eagerly wait for Jehovah,More than watchmen wait for the morning,Yes, more than watchmen wait for the morning. 7 Let Israel keep waiting for Jehovah,For Jehovah is loyal in his love,And he has great power to redeem. 8 He will redeem Israel from all their errors.
A Song of the Ascents. Of David.131 O Jehovah, my heart is not haughty,Nor are my eyes lofty;Nor do I aspire to things too great,Or to things that are beyond me. 2 No, but I have calmed and quieted my soulLike a weaned child with its mother;I am contented like a weaned child. 3 Let Israel wait for JehovahFrom now on and forever.
A Song of the Ascents.132 O Jehovah, remember DavidAnd all his suffering; 2 How he swore to Jehovah,How he vowed to the Powerful One of Jacob: 3 “I will not go into my tent, my home.I will not lie upon my couch, my bed; 4 I will not allow my eyes to sleep,Nor my eyelids to slumber 5 Until I find a place for Jehovah,A fine residence for the Powerful One of Jacob.” 6 Look! We heard about it in Ephʹra·thah;We found it in the fields of the forest. 7 Let us come into his residence;Let us bow down at his footstool. 8 Rise up, O Jehovah, to come to your resting-place,You and the Ark of your strength. 9 May your priests be clothed with righteousness,And may your loyal ones shout joyfully.10 For the sake of David your servant,Do not reject your anointed one.11 Jehovah has sworn to David;He will surely not go back on his word:“One of your offspring,I will place on your throne.12 If your sons keep my covenantAnd my reminders that I teach them,Their sons tooWill sit on your throne forever.”13 For Jehovah has chosen Zion;He has desired it for his dwelling place:14 “This is my resting-place forever;Here I will dwell, for this is my desire.15 I will richly bless it with provisions;I will satisfy its poor with bread.16 Its priests I will clothe with salvation,And its loyal ones will shout joyfully.17 There I will make the strength of David grow.I have prepared a lamp for my anointed one.18 I will clothe his enemies with shame,But the crown on his head will flourish.”
A Song of the Ascents. Of David.133 Look! How good and how pleasant it isFor brothers to dwell together in unity! 2 It is like fine oil poured on the headThat runs down the beard,Aaron’s beard,And runs down onto the collar of his garments. 3 It is like the dew of HerʹmonThat descends on the mountains of Zion.That is where Jehovah decreed his blessing—Life everlasting.
A Song of the Ascents.134 Praise Jehovah,All you servants of Jehovah,You who stand in the house of Jehovah during the nights. 2 Raise your hands in holinessAnd praise Jehovah. 3 May Jehovah, the Maker of heaven and earth,Bless you from Zion.
135 Praise Jah!Praise the name of Jehovah;Offer praise, you servants of Jehovah, 2 You who are standing in the house of Jehovah,In the courtyards of the house of our God. 3 Praise Jah, for Jehovah is good.Sing praises to his name, for it is pleasant. 4 For Jah has chosen Jacob for himself,Israel for his special property. 5 For I well know that Jehovah is great;Our Lord is greater than all other gods. 6 Jehovah does everything he pleases to doIn heaven and on earth, in the seas and all the depths. 7 He causes clouds to ascend from the ends of the earth;He makes lightning for the rain;He brings the wind out of his storehouses. 8 He struck down the firstborn of Egypt,Both man and beast. 9 He sent signs and miracles among you, O Egypt,Against Pharʹaoh and all his servants.10 He struck down many nationsAnd killed mighty kings11 —Siʹhon the king of the Amʹor·ites,Og the king of Baʹshan,And all the kingdoms of Caʹnaan.12 He gave their land as an inheritance,An inheritance to Israel his people.13 O Jehovah, your name endures forever.O Jehovah, your fame endures for all generations.14 For Jehovah will defend his people,And he will feel compassion for his servants.15 The idols of the nations are silver and gold,The work of human hands.16 A mouth they have, but they cannot speak;Eyes, but they cannot see;17 Ears they have, but they cannot hear.There is no breath in their mouth.18 The people who make them will become just like them,As will all those who trust in them.19 O house of Israel, praise Jehovah.O house of Aaron, praise Jehovah.20 O house of Leʹvi, praise Jehovah.You who fear Jehovah, praise Jehovah.21 May Jehovah be praised from Zion,The One residing in Jerusalem.Praise Jah!
136 Give thanks to Jehovah, for he is good;His loyal love endures forever. 2 Give thanks to the God of gods,For his loyal love endures forever. 3 Give thanks to the Lord of lords,For his loyal love endures forever. 4 He alone does great wonders,For his loyal love endures forever. 5 He skillfully made the heavens,For his loyal love endures forever. 6 He spread out the earth over the waters,For his loyal love endures forever. 7 He made the great lights,For his loyal love endures forever, 8 The sun to rule over the day,For his loyal love endures forever, 9 The moon and the stars to rule over the night,For his loyal love endures forever.10 He struck down Egypt’s firstborn,For his loyal love endures forever.11 He brought Israel out from their midst,For his loyal love endures forever,12 With a mighty hand and an outstretched arm,For his loyal love endures forever.13 He split the Red Sea in two,For his loyal love endures forever.14 He caused Israel to pass through the middle of it,For his loyal love endures forever.15 He shook off Pharʹaoh and his army into the Red Sea,For his loyal love endures forever.16 He led his people through the wilderness,For his loyal love endures forever.17 He struck down great kings,For his loyal love endures forever.18 He killed mighty kings,For his loyal love endures forever,19 Siʹhon the king of the Amʹor·ites,For his loyal love endures forever,20 And Og the king of Baʹshan,For his loyal love endures forever.21 He gave their land as an inheritance,For his loyal love endures forever,22 An inheritance to Israel his servant,For his loyal love endures forever.23 He remembered us when we were low,For his loyal love endures forever.24 He kept rescuing us from our adversaries,For his loyal love endures forever.25 He gives food to every living thing,For his loyal love endures forever.26 Give thanks to the God of the heavens,For his loyal love endures forever.
137 By the rivers of Babylon, there we sat.We wept when we remembered Zion. 2 Upon the poplar trees in her midst,We hung our harps. 3 For there our captors asked us for a song,Those mocking us wanted amusement:“Sing for us one of the songs of Zion.” 4 How can we sing the song of JehovahOn foreign soil? 5 If I should forget you, O Jerusalem,Let my right hand be forgetful. 6 Let my tongue stick to my palateIf I do not remember you,If I do not place Jerusalem aboveMy greatest reasons for rejoicing. 7 Remember, O Jehovah,What the Eʹdom·ites said on the day Jerusalem fell:“Tear it down! Tear it down to its foundations!” 8 O daughter of Babylon, who is soon to be devastated,Happy will be the one who rewards youWith the treatment you inflicted on us. 9 Happy will be the one who seizes your childrenAnd dashes them against the rocks.
Of David.138 I will praise you with all my heart.In the face of other gods,I will sing praises. 2 I will bow down toward your holy temple,And I will praise your nameBecause of your loyal love and your faithfulness.For you have magnified your saying and your name above everything else. 3 On the day I called, you answered me;You made me bold and strong. 4 All the kings of the earth will praise you, O Jehovah,For they will have heard the promises you have spoken. 5 They will sing about the ways of Jehovah,For the glory of Jehovah is great. 6 Though Jehovah is high, he takes note of the humble,But the haughty he knows only from a distance. 7 Even when I walk in the midst of danger, you will preserve me alive.You stretch out your hand against the anger of my enemies;Your right hand will save me. 8 Jehovah will accomplish all things in my behalf.O Jehovah, your loyal love endures forever;Do not forsake the works of your hands.
For the director. Of David. A melody.139 O Jehovah, you have searched through me, and you know me. 2 You know when I sit down and when I rise up.You discern my thoughts from afar. 3 You observe me when I travel and when I lie down;You are familiar with all my ways. 4 There is not a word on my tongue,But look! O Jehovah, you already know it well. 5 Behind and before me, you surround me;And you lay your hand upon me. 6 Such knowledge is beyond my comprehension.It is too high for me to reach. 7 Where can I escape from your spirit,And where can I run away from your face? 8 If I were to ascend to heaven, you would be there,And if I were to make my bed in the Grave, look! you would be there. 9 If I would fly away with the wings of the dawnTo reside by the most remote sea,10 Even there your hand would lead meAnd your right hand would take hold of me.11 If I say: “Surely darkness will conceal me!”Then the night around me would become light.12 Even the darkness would not be too dark for you,But night would be as bright as the day;Darkness is the same as light to you.13 For you produced my kidneys;You kept me screened off in my mother’s womb.14 I praise you because in an awe-inspiring way I am wonderfully made.Your works are wonderful,I know this very well.15 My bones were not hidden from youWhen I was made in secret,When I was woven in the depths of the earth.16 Your eyes even saw me as an embryo;All its parts were written in your bookRegarding the days when they were formed,Before any of them existed.17 So to me, how precious your thoughts are!O God, how vast is the sum of them!18 If I try to count them, they outnumber the grains of sand.When I awake, I am still with you.19 O God, if only you would slay the wicked!Then the violent men would depart from me,20 Those who say things against you with evil intent;They are your adversaries who take up your name in a worthless way.21 Do I not hate those who hate you, O Jehovah,And loathe those who revolt against you?22 I have nothing but hatred for them;They have become real enemies to me.23 Search through me, O God, and know my heart.Examine me, and know my anxious thoughts.24 See whether there is in me any harmful way,And lead me in the way of eternity.
To the director. Of David.14 The foolish one says in his heart:“There is no Jehovah.”Their actions are corrupt, and their dealings are detestable;No one is doing good. 2 But Jehovah looks down from heaven on the sons of menTo see whether anyone has insight, whether anyone is seeking Jehovah. 3 They have all turned aside;They are all alike corrupt.No one is doing good,Not even one. 4 Do none of the wrongdoers understand?They devour my people as if they were eating bread.They do not call on Jehovah. 5 But they will be filled with great terror,For Jehovah is with the generation of the righteous. 6 You wrongdoers try to frustrate the plans of the lowly one,But Jehovah is his refuge. 7 O that Israel’s salvation may come from Zion!When Jehovah gathers back his captive people,Let Jacob be joyful, let Israel rejoice.
For the director. A melody of David.140 Rescue me, O Jehovah, from evil men;Protect me from violent men, 2 Those who scheme evil in their heartsAnd stir up conflict all day long. 3 They sharpen their tongue like that of a serpent;Venom of vipers is behind their lips. (Selah) 4 Protect me, O Jehovah, from the hands of the wicked;Safeguard me from violent men,Those who scheme to trip me. 5 The haughty ones hide a trap for me;With ropes they spread out a net beside the path.They set snares for me. (Selah) 6 I say to Jehovah: “You are my God.Listen, O Jehovah, to my pleas for help.” 7 O Jehovah the Sovereign Lord, my strong Savior,You shield my head in the day of battle. 8 Do not grant, O Jehovah, the desires of the wicked.Do not let their plots succeed, so that they are not exalted. (Selah) 9 May the heads of those surrounding meBe covered with the evil spoken by their lips.10 May burning coals rain down on them.May they be hurled into the fire,Into deep pits, never to rise again.11 May the slanderer find no place on the earth.May evil pursue men of violence and strike them down.12 I know that Jehovah will defend the lowlyAnd give justice to the poor.13 Surely the righteous will give thanks to your name;The upright will dwell before your face.
A melody of David.141 O Jehovah, I call on you.Come quickly to help me.Do pay attention when I call to you. 2 May my prayer be as incense prepared before you,My uplifted hands like the evening grain offering. 3 Station a guard for my mouth, O Jehovah,Do set a watch over the door of my lips. 4 Do not let my heart incline to anything bad,To share in vile deeds with evil men;May I never feast on their delicacies. 5 Should the righteous one strike me, it would be an act of loyal love;Should he reprove me, it would be like oil on my head,Which my head would never refuse.My prayer will continue even during their calamities. 6 Though their judges are thrown down from the cliff,The people will pay attention to my words, for they are pleasant. 7 Just as when someone plows and breaks up the soil,So our bones have been scattered at the mouth of the Grave. 8 But my eyes look to you, O Sovereign Lord Jehovah.In you I have taken refuge.Do not take away my life. 9 Protect me from the jaws of the trap they have laid for me,From the snares of evildoers.10 The wicked will fall into their own nets all togetherWhile I pass by safely.
Masʹkil. Of David when he was in the cave. A prayer.142 With my voice I call to Jehovah for help;With my voice I plead with Jehovah for favor. 2 Before him I pour out my concern;Before him I tell about my distress 3 When my spirit fails within me.Then you watch my roadway.In the path where I walk,They hide a trap for me. 4 Look at my right hand and seeThat no one cares about me.There is nowhere I can flee;No one is concerned about me. 5 I call to you, O Jehovah, for help.I say: “You are my refuge,All I have in the land of the living.” 6 Pay attention to my cry for help,For I have been brought very low.Rescue me from my persecutors,For they are stronger than I am. 7 Bring me out of the dungeonTo praise your name.May the righteous gather around meBecause you deal kindly with me.
A melody of David.143 O Jehovah, hear my prayer;Listen to my plea for help.In your faithfulness and in your righteousness, answer me. 2 Do not enter into judgment with your servant,For no one living can be righteous before you. 3 For the enemy pursues me;He has crushed my life into the ground.He has caused me to dwell in darkness like those long dead. 4 My spirit is failing;My heart is numb within me. 5 I remember the days of old;I meditate on all your activity;I eagerly ponder over the work of your hands. 6 I spread out my hands to you;I am like a parched land that thirsts for you. (Selah) 7 Do answer me quickly, O Jehovah;My strength has come to an end.Do not hide your face from me,Or I will be like those going down into the pit. 8 Let me hear your loyal love in the morning,For I trust in you.Make known to me the way I should walk,For to you I turn. 9 Rescue me from my enemies, O Jehovah.I seek your protection.10 Teach me to do your will,For you are my God.Your spirit is good;May it lead me on level ground.11 For the sake of your name, O Jehovah, preserve me alive.In your righteousness, rescue me from distress.12 In your loyal love, put an end to my enemies;Destroy all those harassing me,For I am your servant.
Of David.144 May Jehovah, my Rock, be praised,Who trains my hands for battle,My fingers for warfare. 2 He is my loyal love and my stronghold,My secure refuge and my rescuer,My shield and the One in whom I have taken shelter,The One subduing peoples under me. 3 O Jehovah, what is man that you should notice him,The son of mortal man that you should pay attention to him? 4 Man resembles a mere breath;His days are like a passing shadow. 5 O Jehovah, lower your heavens and descend;Touch the mountains and make them smoke. 6 Make lightning flash and scatter the enemy;Shoot your arrows and throw them into confusion. 7 Stretch out your hands from above;Rescue me and save me from the surging waters,From the hand of the foreigners, 8 Whose mouths speak liesAnd who raise their right hand to swear to what is false. 9 O God, I will sing to you a new song.I will sing praises to you, accompanied by a ten-stringed instrument,10 To the One who gives victory to kings,The One rescuing his servant David from the deadly sword.11 Rescue me and save me from the hand of the foreigners,Whose mouths speak liesAnd who raise their right hand to swear to what is false.12 Then our sons will be like young plants that grow up quickly,Our daughters like corner pillars carved for a palace.13 Our storehouses will overflow with every kind of produce;Our flocks in our fields will multiply by the thousands, by the tens of thousands.14 Our cattle, heavy with young, will suffer no mishap or miscarriage;There will be no cry of distress in our public squares.15 Happy is the people for whom it is this way!Happy is the people whose God is Jehovah!
A praise of David.145 I will exalt you, O my God the King,I will praise your name forever and ever. 2 All day long I will praise you;I will praise your name forever and ever. 3 Jehovah is great and most worthy of praise;His greatness is unsearchable. 4 Generation after generation will praise your works;They will tell about your mighty acts. 5 Of the glorious splendor of your majesty they will speakAnd on your wonderful works I will meditate. 6 They will speak about your awe-inspiring deeds,And I will declare your greatness. 7 They will bubble over as they recall your abundant goodness,And they will shout joyfully because of your righteousness. 8 Jehovah is compassionate and merciful,Slow to anger and great in loyal love. 9 Jehovah is good to all,And his mercy is evident in all his works.10 All your works will glorify you, O Jehovah,And your loyal ones will praise you.11 They will proclaim the glory of your kingshipAnd speak about your mightiness,12 To make known to men your mighty actsAnd the glorious splendor of your kingship.13 Your kingship is an eternal kingship,And your dominion endures throughout all generations.14 Jehovah supports all who are fallingAnd raises up all who are bowed down.15 All eyes look hopefully to you;You give them their food in its season.16 You open your handAnd satisfy the desire of every living thing.17 Jehovah is righteous in all his waysAnd loyal in all that he does.18 Jehovah is near to all those calling on him,To all who call on him in truth.19 He satisfies the desire of those who fear him;He hears their cry for help, and he rescues them.20 Jehovah guards all those who love him,But all the wicked he will annihilate.21 My mouth will declare the praise of Jehovah;Let every living thing praise his holy name forever and ever.
146 Praise Jah!Let my whole being praise Jehovah. 2 I will praise Jehovah all my life.I will sing praises to my God as long as I live. 3 Do not put your trust in princesNor in a son of man, who cannot bring salvation. 4 His spirit goes out, he returns to the ground;On that very day his thoughts perish. 5 Happy is the one who has the God of Jacob as his helper,Whose hope is in Jehovah his God, 6 The Maker of heaven and earth,Of the sea, and of all that is in them,The One who always remains faithful, 7 The One securing justice for those defrauded,The One giving bread to the hungry.Jehovah is releasing the prisoners. 8 Jehovah is opening the eyes of the blind;Jehovah is raising up those bowed down;Jehovah loves the righteous. 9 Jehovah is protecting the foreign residents;He sustains the fatherless child and the widow,But he thwarts the plans of the wicked.10 Jehovah will be King forever,Your God, O Zion, for generation after generation.Praise Jah!
147 Praise Jah!It is good to sing praises to our God;How pleasant and fitting it is to praise him! 2 Jehovah is building Jerusalem;He gathers together the dispersed ones of Israel. 3 He heals the brokenhearted;He binds up their wounds. 4 He counts the number of the stars;He calls all of them by name. 5 Our Lord is great and is mighty in power;His understanding is beyond measure. 6 Jehovah raises up the meek,But he hurls the wicked to the ground. 7 Sing to Jehovah with thanksgiving;Sing praises to our God, accompanied by the harp, 8 The One who covers the heavens with clouds,The One providing rain for the earth,The One making grass sprout on the mountains. 9 To the animals he gives food,To the young ravens that call out for it.10 He does not delight in the power of the horse;Nor is he impressed by the strong legs of a man.11 Jehovah finds pleasure in those who fear him,In those waiting for his loyal love.12 Glorify Jehovah, O Jerusalem.Praise your God, O Zion.13 He makes the bars of your city gates strong;He blesses your sons within you.14 He brings peace to your territory;He satisfies you with the finest wheat.15 He sends his command to the earth;His word runs swiftly.16 He sends the snow like wool;He scatters the frost just like ashes.17 He hurls down his hailstones like morsels of bread.Who can withstand his cold?18 He sends out his word, and they melt.He makes his wind blow, and the waters flow.19 He declares his word to Jacob,His regulations and judgments to Israel.20 He has not done so with any other nation;They know nothing about his judgments.Praise Jah!
148 Praise Jah!Praise Jehovah from the heavens;Praise him in the heights. 2 Praise him, all his angels.Praise him, all his army. 3 Praise him, sun and moon.Praise him, all shining stars. 4 Praise him, O highest heavensAnd waters above the heavens. 5 Let them praise the name of Jehovah,For he commanded, and they were created. 6 He keeps them established forever and ever;He has issued a decree that will not pass away. 7 Praise Jehovah from the earth,You great sea creatures and all deep waters, 8 You lightning and hail, snow and thick clouds,You storm wind, carrying out his word, 9 You mountains and all you hills,You fruit trees and all you cedars,10 You wild animals and all you domestic animals,You creeping things and winged birds,11 You kings of the earth and all you nations,You princes and all you judges of the earth,12 You young men and young women,Old men and young together.13 Let them praise the name of Jehovah,For his name alone is unreachably high.His majesty is above earth and heaven.14 He will exalt the strength of his people,For the praise of all his loyal ones,Of the sons of Israel, the people close to him.Praise Jah!
149 Praise Jah!Sing to Jehovah a new song;Praise him in the congregation of the loyal ones. 2 Let Israel rejoice in its Grand Maker;Let the sons of Zion be joyful in their King. 3 Let them praise his name with dancingAnd sing praises to him, accompanied by the tambourine and the harp. 4 For Jehovah takes pleasure in his people.He adorns the meek with salvation. 5 Let the loyal ones exult in glory;Let them shout for joy upon their beds. 6 Let the songs praising God be in their throat,And a two-edged sword be in their hand, 7 To execute vengeance on the nationsAnd punishment on the peoples, 8 To bind their kings with shacklesAnd their nobles with iron fetters, 9 To execute the judgment written against them.This honor belongs to all his loyal ones.Praise Jah!
A melody of David.15 O Jehovah, who may be a guest in your tent?Who may reside in your holy mountain? 2 The one who is walking faultlessly,Practicing what is rightAnd speaking the truth in his heart. 3 He does not slander with his tongue,He does nothing bad to his neighbor,And he does not defame his friends. 4 He rejects anyone who is contemptible,But he honors those fearing Jehovah.He does not go back on his promise, even when it is bad for him. 5 He does not lend his money on interest,And he does not accept a bribe against the innocent.Whoever does these things will never be shaken.
150 Praise Jah!Praise God in his holy place.Praise him in the expanse of his strength. 2 Praise him for his mighty works.Praise him for his exceeding greatness. 3 Praise him with the sounding of the horn.Praise him with the stringed instrument and the harp. 4 Praise him with the tambourine and the circle dance.Praise him with strings and the flute. 5 Praise him with ringing cymbals.Praise him with crashing cymbals. 6 Every breathing thing—let it praise Jah.Praise Jah!
A mikʹtam of David.16 Protect me, O God, for I have taken refuge in you. 2 I have said to Jehovah: “You are Jehovah, my Source of goodness. 3 And the holy ones in the earth,The majestic ones, bring me great delight.” 4 Those who pursue other gods multiply their sorrows.I will never pour out their drink offerings of blood,Nor will my lips mention their names. 5 Jehovah is my portion, my allotted share, and my cup.You safeguard my inheritance. 6 Pleasant places have been measured out to me.Yes, I am content with my inheritance. 7 I will praise Jehovah, who has given me advice.Even during the night, my innermost thoughts correct me. 8 I keep Jehovah before me constantly.Because he is at my right hand, I will never be shaken. 9 So my heart rejoices, my whole being is joyful.And I reside in security.10 For you will not leave me in the Grave.You will not allow your loyal one to see the pit.11 You make known to me the path of life.In your presence is abundant joy;There is happiness at your right hand forever.
A prayer of David.17 Hear my plea for justice, O Jehovah;Pay attention to my cry for help;Listen to my prayer spoken without deceit. 2 May you make a just decision in my behalf;May your eyes see what is right. 3 You have examined my heart, you have inspected me by night;You have refined me;You will find that I have not schemed anything bad,And my mouth has not transgressed. 4 As for the activities of men,In accord with the word of your lips, I avoid the paths of the robber. 5 Let my steps stay on your tracksSo that my feet will not stumble. 6 I do call on you, because you will answer me, O God.Incline your ear to me. Hear my words. 7 Show your loyal love in a wonderful way,O Savior of those seeking refuge at your right handFrom those who rebel against you. 8 Guard me like the pupil of your eye;Conceal me in the shadow of your wings. 9 Guard me from the wicked who attack me,From my mortal enemies who surround me.10 They have become insensitive;With their mouth they speak arrogantly;11 Now they hem us in;They watch for the chance to cause our downfall.12 He is like a lion eager to tear its prey to pieces,Like a young lion crouching in ambush.13 Rise up, O Jehovah, to confront him and bring him down;Rescue me from the wicked with your sword;14 Rescue me with your hand, O Jehovah,From men of this world, whose share is in this life,Those whom you fill with the good things you provideAnd who leave an inheritance to their many sons.15 But as for me, in righteousness I will see your face;I am satisfied to awaken in your presence.
To the director. By Jehovah’s servant David, who addressed the words of this song to Jehovah in the day that Jehovah rescued him from the hand of all his enemies and from the hand of Saul. He said:18 I have affection for you, O Jehovah, my strength. 2 Jehovah is my crag and my stronghold and the One who rescues me.My God is my rock, in whom I take refuge,My shield and my horn of salvation, my secure refuge. 3 I call on Jehovah, who is worthy of praise,And I will be saved from my enemies. 4 The ropes of death encircled me;Flash floods of worthless men terrified me. 5 The ropes of the Grave surrounded me;The snares of death confronted me. 6 In my distress I called on Jehovah,To my God I kept crying for help.From his temple he heard my voice,And my cry to him for help reached his ears. 7 Then the earth began to shake and rock;The foundations of the mountains trembledAnd shook back and forth because he had been angered. 8 Smoke ascended from his nostrils,And a consuming fire came from his mouth;Glowing coals blazed from him. 9 He made the heavens bend as he descended,And thick gloom was beneath his feet.10 He rode on a cherub and came flying.He swooped down on the wings of a spirit.11 He then covered himself in darkness,All around him as a shelter,Dark waters and thick clouds.12 From the brightness before himHail and fiery coals broke through the clouds.13 Then Jehovah began to thunder in the heavens;The Most High made his voice heardWith hailstones and fiery coals.14 He shot his arrows and scattered them;He hurled his lightning and threw them into confusion.15 The streambeds became visible;The foundations of the land were exposed by your rebuke, O Jehovah,By the blast of the breath from your nostrils.16 He reached down from on high;He took hold of me and pulled me from deep waters.17 He rescued me from my strong enemy,From those hating me, who were stronger than I was.18 They confronted me on the day of my disaster,But Jehovah was my support.19 He brought me out into a place of safety;He rescued me because he was pleased with me.20 Jehovah rewards me according to my righteousness;He repays me according to the innocence of my hands.21 For I have kept the ways of Jehovah,And I have not wickedly abandoned my God.22 All his judgments are before me;I will not disregard his statutes.23 I will remain blameless before him,And I will keep myself from error.24 May Jehovah repay me according to my righteousness,According to the innocence of my hands before him.25 With someone loyal you act in loyalty;With the blameless man you deal blamelessly;26 With the pure you show yourself pure,But with the crooked you show yourself shrewd.27 For you save those who are lowlyBut you abase the haughty.28 For it is you who light my lamp, O Jehovah,My God who lights up my darkness.29 With your help I can charge against a marauder band;By God’s power I can scale a wall.30 The way of the true God is perfect;The saying of Jehovah is refined.He is a shield to all those taking refuge in him.31 For who is a God besides Jehovah?And who is a rock except our God?32 The true God is the one who clothes me with strength,And he will make my way perfect.33 He makes my feet like those of a deer;He makes me stand on high places.34 He trains my hands for warfare;My arms can bend a bow of copper.35 You give me your shield of salvation,Your right hand supports me,And your humility makes me great.36 You widen the path for my footsteps;My feet will not slip.37 I will pursue my enemies and overtake them;I will not return until they are wiped out.38 I will crush them so that they cannot rise up;They will fall under my feet.39 You will equip me with strength for the battle;You will make my foes collapse under me.40 You will make my enemies retreat from me,And I will put an end to those who hate me.41 They cry for help, but there is no one to save them;They even cry to Jehovah, but he does not answer them.42 I will pound them as fine as dust in the wind;I will throw them out like mud in the streets.43 You will rescue me from the faultfinding of the people.You will appoint me the head of nations.A people whom I have not known will serve me.44 At a mere report they will obey me;Foreigners will come cringing before me.45 Foreigners will lose courage;They will come trembling from their strongholds.46 Jehovah is alive! Praised be my Rock!Let the God of my salvation be exalted.47 The true God executes vengeance for me;He subdues the peoples under me.48 He rescues me from my angry enemies;You lift me high above those who attack me;You save me from the man of violence.49 That is why I will glorify you among the nations, O Jehovah,And to your name I will sing praises.50 He performs great acts of salvation for his king;He displays loyal love to his anointed one,To David and his offspring forever.
To the director. A melody of David.19 The heavens are declaring the glory of God;The skies above proclaim the work of his hands. 2 Day after day their speech bubbles forth,And night after night they reveal knowledge. 3 There is no speech, and there are no words;Their voice is not heard. 4 But into all the earth their sound has gone out,And to the ends of the inhabited earth their message.In the heavens he has pitched a tent for the sun; 5 It is like a bridegroom emerging from the bridal chamber;It rejoices like a mighty man running his course. 6 It emerges from one end of the heavens,And it circles to their other end;And nothing is concealed from its heat. 7 The law of Jehovah is perfect, restoring strength.The reminder of Jehovah is trustworthy, making the inexperienced one wise. 8 The orders from Jehovah are righteous, causing the heart to rejoice;The commandment of Jehovah is clean, making the eyes shine. 9 The fear of Jehovah is pure, lasting forever.The judgments of Jehovah are true, altogether righteous.10 They are more desirable than gold,Than much fine gold,And sweeter than honey, the honey that drips from the combs.11 By them your servant has been warned;In keeping them, there is a large reward.12 Who can discern mistakes?Pronounce me innocent from sins I am unaware of.13 And hold your servant back from presumptuous acts;Do not let them dominate me.Then I will be complete,And innocent of blatant sins.14 May the words of my mouth and the meditation of my heartBe pleasing to you, O Jehovah, my Rock and my Redeemer.
2 Why are the nations agitatedAnd the peoples muttering an empty thing? 2 The kings of the earth take their standAnd high officials gather together as oneAgainst Jehovah and against his anointed one. 3 They say: “Let us tear off their shacklesAnd throw off their ropes!” 4 The One enthroned in the heavens will laugh;Jehovah will scoff at them. 5 At that time he will speak to them in his angerAnd terrify them in his burning anger, 6 Saying: “I myself have installed my kingOn Zion, my holy mountain.” 7 Let me proclaim the decree of Jehovah;He said to me: “You are my son;Today I have become your father. 8 Ask of me, and I will give nations as your inheritanceAnd the ends of the earth as your possession. 9 You will break them with an iron scepter,And you will smash them like a piece of pottery.”10 So now, you kings, show insight;Accept correction, you judges of the earth.11 Serve Jehovah with fear,And rejoice with trembling.12 Honor the son, or God will become indignantAnd you will perish from the way,For His anger flares up quickly.Happy are all those taking refuge in Him.
To the director. A melody of David.20 May Jehovah answer you in the day of distress.May the name of the God of Jacob protect you. 2 May he send you help from the holy placeAnd sustain you from Zion. 3 May he remember all your gift offerings;May he accept with favor your burnt offering. (Selah) 4 May he grant you the desires of your heartAnd give success to all your plans. 5 We will shout joyfully over your acts of salvation;We will lift our banners in the name of our God.May Jehovah fulfill all your requests. 6 Now I do know that Jehovah saves his anointed one.He answers him from his holy heavensWith great salvation by his right hand. 7 Some rely on chariots and others on horses,But we call on the name of Jehovah our God. 8 They have collapsed and fallen,But we have risen up and been restored. 9 O Jehovah, save the king!He will answer us in the day we call for help.
To the director. A melody of David.21 O Jehovah, in your strength the king rejoices;How greatly he rejoices in your acts of salvation! 2 You have granted him the desire of his heart,And you have not withheld the request of his lips. (Selah) 3 For you meet him with rich blessings;You place a crown of fine gold on his head. 4 He asked you for life, and you gave it to him,A long life, forever and ever. 5 Your acts of salvation bring him great glory.Dignity and splendor you bestow on him. 6 You make him blessed forever;You make him glad with the joy of your presence. 7 For the king trusts in Jehovah;Because of the loyal love of the Most High, he will never be shaken. 8 Your hand will find all your enemies;Your right hand will find those hating you. 9 You will make them like a fiery furnace at the appointed time when you give them attention.Jehovah will swallow them up in his anger, and fire will consume them.10 Their descendants you will destroy from the earth,And their offspring from the sons of men.11 For they intended to do what is bad against you;They have devised schemes that will not succeed.12 For you will make them retreatBy aiming your bow at them.13 Rise up, O Jehovah, in your strength.We will sing praises to your mightiness.
To the director; set to “The Doe of the Dawn.” A melody of David.22 My God, my God, why have you forsaken me?Why are you far from saving me,Far from my cries of anguish? 2 My God, I keep calling by day, and you do not answer;And by night there is no silence on my part. 3 But you are holy,Surrounded by the praises of Israel. 4 In you our fathers put their trust;They trusted, and you kept rescuing them. 5 To you they cried out, and they were saved;They trusted in you, and they were not disappointed. 6 But I am a worm and not a man,Scorned by men and despised by the people. 7 All those seeing me mock me;They sneer and shake their heads in derision: 8 “He entrusted himself to Jehovah. Let Him rescue him!Let Him save him, for he is so dear to Him!” 9 You were the One who brought me out of the womb,The One who made me feel secure on my mother’s breasts.10 I have been entrusted to your care from birth;From my mother’s womb, you have been my God.11 Do not stay far off from me, for trouble is nearAnd I have no other helper.12 Many young bulls surround me;Powerful bulls of Baʹshan encircle me.13 They open their mouth wide against me,Like a roaring lion that tears its prey to pieces.14 I am poured out like water;All my bones are out of joint.My heart has become like wax;It melts deep within me.15 My strength has dried up like a piece of pottery;My tongue sticks to my gums;You are bringing me down to the dust of death.16 For dogs surround me;They close in on me like a pack of evildoers,Like a lion they are at my hands and feet.17 I can count all my bones.They look on and stare at me.18 They divide my garments among themselves,And they cast lots for my clothing.19 But you, O Jehovah, do not remain far away.You are my strength; hurry to help me.20 Save me from the sword,My precious life from the paws of dogs;21 Save me from the mouth of the lion and the horns of wild bulls;Answer and save me.22 I will declare your name to my brothers;In the midst of the congregation I will praise you.23 You who fear Jehovah, praise him!All you offspring of Jacob, glorify him!Stand in awe of him, all you offspring of Israel.24 For he has not despised nor loathed the suffering of the oppressed one;He has not hidden his face from him.When he cried to him for help, he heard.25 I will praise you in the large congregation;I will pay my vows before those who fear him.26 The meek will eat and be satisfied;Those seeking Jehovah will praise him.May you enjoy life forever.27 All the ends of the earth will remember and turn to Jehovah.All the families of the nations will bow down before you.28 For the kingship belongs to Jehovah;He rules over the nations.29 All the prosperous ones of the earth will eat and will bow down;All those going down to the dust will kneel before him;None of them can preserve their lives.30 Their descendants will serve him;The generation to come will be told about Jehovah.31 They will come and tell of his righteousness.They will tell the people yet to be born what he has done.
A melody of David.23 Jehovah is my Shepherd.I will lack nothing. 2 In grassy pastures he makes me lie down;He leads me to well-watered resting-places. 3 He refreshes me.He leads me in the paths of righteousness for the sake of his name. 4 Though I walk in the valley of deep shadow,I fear no harm,For you are with me;Your rod and your staff reassure me. 5 You prepare a table for me before my enemies.You refresh my head with oil;My cup is well-filled. 6 Surely goodness and loyal love will pursue me all the days of my life,And I will dwell in the house of Jehovah for all my days.
Of David. A melody.24 To Jehovah belong the earth and everything in it,The productive land and those dwelling on it. 2 For he has solidly fixed it on the seasAnd firmly established it on the rivers. 3 Who may ascend to the mountain of Jehovah,And who may stand up in his holy place? 4 Anyone with innocent hands and a pure heart,Who has not sworn a false oath by My life,Nor taken an oath deceitfully. 5 He will receive blessings from JehovahAnd righteousness from his God of salvation. 6 This is the generation of those seeking him,Of those seeking your face, O God of Jacob. (Selah) 7 Lift up your heads, you gates;Open up, you ancient doorways,That the glorious King may enter! 8 Who is this glorious King?Jehovah, strong and mighty,Jehovah, mighty in battle. 9 Lift up your heads, you gates;Open up, you ancient doorways,That the glorious King may enter!10 Who is he, this glorious King?Jehovah of armies—he is the glorious King. (Selah)
Of David.25 To you, O Jehovah, I turn. 2 My God, I trust in you;Do not let me be put to shame.Do not let my enemies gloat over me. 3 Surely none who hope in you will be put to shame,But shame awaits those who are treacherous without cause. 4 Make me know your ways, O Jehovah;Teach me your paths. 5 Cause me to walk in your truth and teach me,For you are my God of salvation.In you I hope all day long. 6 Remember your mercy, O Jehovah, and your loyal love,Which you have always shown. 7 Do not remember the sins of my youth and my transgressions.Remember me according to your loyal love,For the sake of your goodness, O Jehovah. 8 Good and upright is Jehovah.That is why he instructs sinners in the way to live. 9 He will guide the meek in what is right,And he will teach the meek ones his way.10 All the paths of Jehovah are loyal love and faithfulnessFor those observing his covenant and his reminders.11 For the sake of your name, O Jehovah,Forgive my error, though it is great.12 Who is the man fearing Jehovah?He will instruct him about the way he should choose.13 He will experience what is good,And his descendants will take possession of the earth.14 Close friendship with Jehovah belongs to those who fear him,And he makes his covenant known to them.15 My eyes are always toward Jehovah,For he will free my feet from the net.16 Turn your face to me and show me favor,For I am alone and helpless.17 The distresses of my heart have multiplied;Free me from my anguish.18 See my affliction and my trouble,And pardon all my sins.19 See how numerous my enemies areAnd how violent their hatred is for me.20 Guard my life and save me.Do not let me be put to shame, for I have taken refuge in you.21 May integrity and uprightness safeguard me,For my hope is in you.22 O God, rescue Israel out of all his distresses.
Of David.26 Judge me, O Jehovah, for I have walked in my integrity;In Jehovah I have trusted without wavering. 2 Examine me, O Jehovah, and put me to the test;Refine my innermost thoughts and my heart. 3 For your loyal love is always in front of me,And I walk in your truth. 4 I do not associate with deceitful men,And I avoid those who hide what they are. 5 I hate the company of evil men,And I refuse to associate with the wicked. 6 I will wash my hands in innocence,And I will march around your altar, O Jehovah, 7 To cause the sound of thanksgiving to be heardAnd to declare all your wonderful works. 8 Jehovah, I love the house where you dwell,The place where your glory resides. 9 Do not sweep me away with sinnersNor take my life away with violent men,10 Whose hands engage in shameful conduct,And whose right hand is full of bribes.11 But as for me, I will walk in my integrity.Rescue me and show me favor.12 My foot is standing on level ground;In the great congregation, I will praise Jehovah.
Of David.27 Jehovah is my light and my salvation.Whom should I fear?Jehovah is the stronghold of my life.Whom should I dread? 2 When evil men attacked me to devour my flesh,My adversaries and my enemies were the ones who stumbled and fell. 3 Though an army should set up camp against me,My heart will not fear.Though war should break out against me,Even then I will remain confident. 4 One thing I have asked from Jehovah—It is what I will look for—That I may dwell in the house of Jehovah all the days of my life,To gaze upon the pleasantness of JehovahAnd to look with appreciation upon his temple. 5 For he will hide me in his shelter on the day of calamity;He will conceal me in the secret place of his tent;High on a rock he will place me. 6 Now my head is high above my enemies who surround me;I will offer sacrifices at his tent with joyful shouting;I will sing praises to Jehovah. 7 Hear me, O Jehovah, when I cry out;Show me favor and answer me. 8 Speaking for you, my heart has said:“Seek to find my face.”Your face, O Jehovah, I will seek to find. 9 Do not hide your face from me.Do not turn your servant away in your anger.You are my helper;Do not forsake me or leave me, my God of salvation.10 Even if my own father and mother abandon me,Jehovah himself will take me in.11 Instruct me in your way, O Jehovah,Lead me in the path of uprightness because of my foes.12 Do not hand me over to my adversaries,For false witnesses have risen up against me,And they threaten me with violence.13 Where would I be if I did not have faithThat I would see Jehovah’s goodness in the land of the living?14 Hope in Jehovah;Be courageous and strong of heart.Yes, hope in Jehovah.
Of David.28 To you I keep calling, O Jehovah my Rock;Do not turn a deaf ear to me.If you keep silent toward me,I will become like those going down to the pit. 2 Hear my pleas when I cry to you for helpAs I lift up my hands toward the innermost room of your sanctuary. 3 Do not drag me away with the wicked, with those practicing what is hurtful,Those who are speaking words of peace with their fellow man while evil is in their hearts. 4 Pay them back for their deeds,According to their evil practices.Repay them for the work of their hands,According to what they have done. 5 For they pay no attention to the activities of Jehovah,Nor to the work of his hands.He will tear them down and not build them up. 6 May Jehovah be praised,For he has heard my pleas for help. 7 Jehovah is my strength and my shield;In him my heart trusts.I have received his help, and my heart rejoices,So I will praise him with my song. 8 Jehovah is a strength for his people;He is a stronghold, bringing grand salvation to his anointed one. 9 Save your people, and bless your inheritance.Shepherd them and carry them in your arms forever.
A melody of David.29 Give Jehovah his due, you sons of mighty ones,Give Jehovah his due for his glory and strength. 2 Give Jehovah the glory due his name.Bow down to Jehovah in holy adornment. 3 The voice of Jehovah is heard over the waters;The glorious God thunders.Jehovah is over many waters. 4 The voice of Jehovah is powerful;The voice of Jehovah is splendid. 5 The voice of Jehovah is breaking the cedars;Yes, Jehovah shatters the cedars of Lebʹa·non. 6 He makes Lebʹa·non skip like a calf,And Sirʹi·on like a young wild bull. 7 The voice of Jehovah strikes with flames of fire; 8 The voice of Jehovah makes the wilderness shudder;Jehovah makes the wilderness of Kaʹdesh shudder. 9 The voice of Jehovah makes the deer shudder and give birthAnd strips bare the forests.And all in his temple say: “Glory!”10 Jehovah sits enthroned above the flooding waters;Jehovah sits enthroned as King forever.11 Jehovah will give strength to his people.Jehovah will bless his people with peace.
A melody of David when he was fleeing from his son Abʹsa·lom.3 O Jehovah, why have my adversaries become so numerous?Why are so many rising up against me? 2 Many are saying about me:“God will not save him.” (Selah) 3 But you, O Jehovah, are a shield around me,My glory and the One who lifts up my head. 4 I will call aloud to Jehovah,And he will answer me from his holy mountain. (Selah) 5 I will lie down and sleep;And I will wake up in safety,For Jehovah continues to support me. 6 I am not afraid of the tens of thousandsLined up against me on every side. 7 Rise up, O Jehovah! Save me, O my God!For you will strike all my enemies on the jaw;You will break the teeth of the wicked. 8 Salvation belongs to Jehovah.Your blessing is upon your people. (Selah)
A melody. A song of inauguration of the house. Of David.30 I will exalt you, O Jehovah, for you have lifted me up;You did not let my enemies rejoice over me. 2 O Jehovah my God, I cried to you for help, and you healed me. 3 O Jehovah, you have lifted me up from the Grave.You kept me alive; you spared me from sinking into the pit. 4 Sing praises to Jehovah, you his loyal ones,Give thanks to his holy name; 5 Because being under his anger is only for a moment,But being in his favor is for a lifetime.Weeping may come in the evening, but in the morning, there is a joyful cry. 6 When I was untroubled, I said:“I will never be shaken.” 7 O Jehovah, while I was in your favor, you made me as strong as a mountain.But when you hid your face, I became terrified. 8 To you, O Jehovah, I kept calling;And to Jehovah, I kept pleading for favor. 9 What profit is there in my death, in my going down to the pit?Will the dust praise you? Will it tell of your faithfulness?10 Hear, O Jehovah, and show me favor.O Jehovah, become my helper.11 You have changed my mourning into dancing;You have removed my sackcloth, and you clothe me with rejoicing,12 So that I may sing your praise and not keep silent.O Jehovah my God, I will praise you forever.
To the director. A melody of David.31 In you, O Jehovah, I have taken refuge.May I never be put to shame.Rescue me because of your righteousness. 2 Incline your ear to me.Come quickly to my rescue.Become for me a mountain stronghold,A fortified place to save me. 3 For you are my crag and my stronghold;For the sake of your name, you will lead me and guide me. 4 You will free me from the net that they have secretly laid for me,For you are my fortress. 5 Into your hand I entrust my spirit.You have redeemed me, O Jehovah, the God of truth. 6 I hate those who are devoted to worthless, vain idols,But as for me, I trust in Jehovah. 7 I will rejoice greatly in your loyal love,For you have seen my affliction;You are aware of my deep distress. 8 You have not handed me over to the enemy,But you make me stand in a place of safety. 9 Show me favor, O Jehovah, for I am in distress.Anguish has made my eyes weak, my whole body as well.10 My life is consumed with griefAnd my years with groaning.My strength is waning because of my error;My bones grow weak.11 I am scorned by all my adversaries,Especially my neighbors.And I am dreaded by my acquaintances;When they see me in public, they flee from me.12 I am put out of their heart and forgotten, as if I were dead;I am like a broken jar.13 I have heard many evil rumors;Terror surrounds me.When they gather together as one against me,They scheme to take away my life.14 But I trust in you, O Jehovah.I declare: “You are my God.”15 My days are in your hand.Rescue me from the hand of my enemies and from those persecuting me.16 Make your face shine upon your servant.Save me by your loyal love.17 O Jehovah, may I not be put to shame when I call on you.May the wicked be put to shame;May they be silenced in the Grave.18 May lying lips become speechless,Lips that speak arrogantly against the righteous, with haughtiness and contempt.19 How abundant your goodness is!You have stored it up for those who fear you,And you have shown it before all men, in behalf of those taking refuge in you.20 You will conceal them in the secret place of your presenceFrom the schemes of men;You will hide them in your shelterFrom malicious attacks.21 May Jehovah be praised,For in a wonderful way, he has shown his loyal love to me in a besieged city.22 As for me, I panicked and said:“I will perish from before you.”But you heard my pleas for help when I cried out to you.23 Love Jehovah, all you who are loyal to him!Jehovah protects the faithful,But he repays exceedingly anyone showing haughtiness.24 Be courageous, and may your heart be strong,All you who are waiting for Jehovah.
Of David. Masʹkil.32 Happy is the one whose transgression is pardoned, whose sin is covered. 2 Happy is the man whom Jehovah does not charge with guilt,In whose spirit there is no deceit. 3 When I kept silent, my bones wasted away because of my groaning all day long. 4 For day and night your hand was heavy upon me.My strength evaporated like water in the dry summer heat. (Selah) 5 Finally I confessed my sin to you;I did not cover my error.I said: “I will confess my transgressions to Jehovah.”And you pardoned the error of my sins. (Selah) 6 This is why every loyal one will pray to youWhile you may yet be found.Then even the floodwaters will not reach him. 7 You are a hiding place for me;You will safeguard me from distress.You will surround me with joyful shouts of deliverance. (Selah) 8 “I will give you insight and instruct you in the way you should go.I will give you advice with my eye upon you. 9 Do not become like a horse or a mule, without understanding,Whose spiritedness must be controlled with a bridle or a halterBefore it will come near to you.”10 Many are the pains of the wicked;But the one trusting in Jehovah is surrounded by His loyal love.11 Rejoice in Jehovah and be joyful, you righteous ones;Shout joyfully, all you who are upright in heart.
33 Shout joyfully, you righteous ones, because of Jehovah.It is fitting for the upright to praise him. 2 Give thanks to Jehovah with the harp;Sing praises to him with a ten-stringed instrument. 3 Sing to him a new song;Play skillfully on the strings, along with shouts of joy. 4 For the word of Jehovah is upright,And everything he does is trustworthy. 5 He loves righteousness and justice.The earth is filled with Jehovah’s loyal love. 6 By the word of Jehovah the heavens were made,And by the spirit of his mouth everything in them. 7 He gathers the seawaters like a dam;He puts the surging waters in storehouses. 8 Let the whole earth fear Jehovah.Let the inhabitants of the productive land be in awe of him. 9 For he spoke, and it came to be;He commanded, and it stood firm.10 Jehovah has frustrated the schemes of the nations;He has thwarted the plans of the peoples.11 But the decisions of Jehovah will stand forever;The thoughts of his heart are from generation to generation.12 Happy is the nation whose God is Jehovah,The people he has chosen as his own possession.13 Jehovah looks down from heaven;He sees all the sons of men.14 From his place of residence,He gazes on the inhabitants of the earth.15 He is the one forming the hearts of all;He examines all their works.16 No king is saved by a large army;A mighty man is not saved by his great power.17 The horse is a false hope for salvation;Its great strength does not ensure escape.18 Look! The eye of Jehovah watches over those fearing him,Those waiting for his loyal love,19 To rescue them from deathAnd to keep them alive during famine.20 We are in expectation of Jehovah.He is our helper and our shield.21 Our hearts rejoice in him,For we trust in his holy name.22 May your loyal love rest upon us, O Jehovah,While we keep waiting for you.
Of David, when he disguised his sanity before A·bimʹe·lech, who drove him away, and he left.34 I will praise Jehovah at all times;His praise will be on my lips constantly. 2 I will boast in Jehovah;The meek will hear and rejoice. 3 Magnify Jehovah along with me;Let us exalt his name together. 4 I inquired of Jehovah, and he answered me.He rescued me from all my fears. 5 Those who looked to him became radiant;Their faces could not be put to shame. 6 This lowly one called, and Jehovah heard.He saved him from all his distresses. 7 The angel of Jehovah camps all around those fearing Him,And he rescues them. 8 Taste and see that Jehovah is good;Happy is the man who takes refuge in him. 9 Fear Jehovah, all you his holy ones,For those who fear him lack nothing.10 Even strong young lions have been reduced to hunger,But those seeking Jehovah will lack nothing good.11 Come, my sons, listen to me;I will teach you the fear of Jehovah.12 Who among you takes pleasure in lifeAnd would love to see many good days?13 Then guard your tongue from what is bad,Your lips from speaking deception.14 Turn away from what is bad and do what is good;Seek peace and pursue it.15 The eyes of Jehovah are on the righteous,And his ears listen to their cry for help.16 But the face of Jehovah is against those doing what is bad,To erase all memory of them from the earth.17 They cried out, and Jehovah heard;He rescued them from all their distresses.18 Jehovah is close to the brokenhearted;He saves those who are crushed in spirit.19 Many are the hardships of the righteous one,But Jehovah rescues him from them all.20 He is guarding all his bones;Not one of them has been broken.21 Disaster will put the wicked to death;Those hating the righteous will be found guilty.22 Jehovah is redeeming the life of his servants;None of those taking refuge in him will be found guilty.
Of David.35 O Jehovah, defend my case against my opposers;Fight against those who fight against me. 2 Take up your buckler and large shield,And rise up to my defense. 3 Lift up your spear and battle-ax against my pursuers.Say to me: “I am your salvation.” 4 May those who are hunting for my life be put to shame and humiliated.May those who are plotting to destroy me retreat in disgrace. 5 May they become like chaff in the wind;May Jehovah’s angel drive them away. 6 May their path be dark and slipperyAs Jehovah’s angel pursues them. 7 For without cause they have hidden a net to trap me;Without cause they have dug a pit for me. 8 May disaster come upon him by surprise;May the net that he hid catch him;May he fall into it and be destroyed. 9 But I will rejoice in Jehovah;I will be joyful in his acts of salvation.10 All my bones will say:“O Jehovah, who is like you?You rescue the helpless from those who are stronger,The helpless and the poor from those who rob them.”11 Malicious witnesses come forward,Asking me things I know nothing about.12 They repay me with bad for good,Making me feel bereaved.13 But when they were ill, I clothed myself with sackcloth;I afflicted myself by fasting,And when my prayer would return unanswered,14 I walked about mourning as for a friend or a brother of mine;I bowed down in sorrow, like one mourning for his mother.15 But when I stumbled, they rejoiced and gathered together;They gathered together to strike me down in ambush;They tore me to pieces and did not keep silent.16 The ungodly scornfully mock me,They grind their teeth against me.17 O Jehovah, how long will you just look on?Rescue me from their attacks,My precious life from the young lions.18 Then I will give thanks to you in the great congregation;I will praise you among the throngs of people.19 Do not let those who for no reason are my enemies gloat over me;Do not let those hating me without cause wink their eyes maliciously.20 For they do not speak words of peace,But they deceptively scheme against the peaceful ones of the land.21 They open their mouth wide to accuse me,Saying: “Aha! Aha! Our eyes have seen it.”22 You have seen this, O Jehovah. Do not remain silent.O Jehovah, do not stay far from me.23 Awake and rise to my defense,My God, Jehovah, defend me in my legal case.24 Judge me according to your righteousness, O Jehovah my God;Do not let them gloat over me.25 May they never say to themselves: “Aha! We got what we wanted.”May they never say: “We have swallowed him up.”26 Let all of them be put to shame and disgraced,Those who gloat over my calamity.Let those who exalt themselves over me be clothed with shame and humiliation.27 But let those who take pleasure in my righteousness shout joyfully;May they constantly say:“May Jehovah be magnified, who takes pleasure in the peace of his servant.”28 Then my tongue will recount your righteousnessAnd praise you all day long.
To the director. Of Jehovah’s servant, David.36 Transgression speaks to the wicked one deep within his heart;There is no fear of God before his eyes. 2 For in his own eyes he flatters himself too muchTo detect and hate his error. 3 The words of his mouth are hurtful and deceptive;He shows no insight for doing what is good. 4 He plots hurtful schemes even on his bed.He is set on a path that is not good;He does not reject what is bad. 5 O Jehovah, your loyal love reaches to the heavens,Your faithfulness up to the clouds. 6 Your righteousness is like majestic mountains;Your judgments are like vast, deep waters.Man and beast you preserve, O Jehovah. 7 How precious your loyal love is, O God!In the shadow of your wings,The sons of men take refuge. 8 They drink their fill of the rich bounty of your house,And you cause them to drink of the torrent of your delights. 9 With you is the source of life;By your light we can see light.10 Continue showing your loyal love to those who know you,And your righteousness, to the upright in heart.11 Do not let the foot of the haughty tread on meOr the hand of the wicked drive me away.12 There the wrongdoers have fallen;They have been knocked down and cannot get up.
Of David.37 Do not be upset because of evil menOr envious of wrongdoers. 2 They will quickly wither like grassAnd shrivel like green new grass. 3 Trust in Jehovah and do what is good;Reside in the earth, and act with faithfulness. 4 Find exquisite delight in Jehovah,And he will grant you the desires of your heart. 5 Commit your way to Jehovah;Rely on him, and he will act in your behalf. 6 He will make your righteousness shine like daybreak,And your justice like the midday sun. 7 Keep silent before JehovahAnd wait expectantly for him.Do not be upset by the manWho succeeds in carrying out his schemes. 8 Let go of anger and abandon rage;Do not become upset and turn to doing evil. 9 For evil men will be done away with,But those hoping in Jehovah will possess the earth.10 Just a little while longer, and the wicked will be no more;You will look at where they were,And they will not be there.11 But the meek will possess the earth,And they will find exquisite delight in the abundance of peace.12 The wicked man plots against the righteous;He grinds his teeth at him.13 But Jehovah will laugh at him,For He knows that his day will come.14 The wicked draw their swords and bend their bowsTo bring down the oppressed and the poor,To slaughter those whose way is upright.15 But their sword will pierce their own heart;Their bows will be broken.16 Better is the little of the righteous oneThan the abundance of many wicked ones.17 For the arms of the wicked will be broken,But Jehovah will support the righteous.18 Jehovah is aware of what the blameless go through,And their inheritance will last forever.19 They will not be put to shame in the time of disaster;In the time of famine they will have plenty.20 But the wicked will perish;The enemies of Jehovah will vanish like glorious pastures;They will vanish like smoke.21 The wicked one borrows and does not repay,But the righteous one is generous and giving.22 Those blessed by Him will possess the earth,But those cursed by Him will be done away with.23 Jehovah guides the steps of a manWhen He finds pleasure in his way.24 Although he may fall, he will not be hurled down,For Jehovah supports him by the hand.25 I was once young and now I am old,But I have not seen anyone righteous abandoned,Nor his children looking for bread.26 He always lends freely,And his children are in line for a blessing.27 Turn away from bad and do what is good,And you will remain forever.28 For Jehovah loves justice,And he will not abandon his loyal ones.They will always be guarded;But the descendants of the wicked will be done away with.29 The righteous will possess the earth,And they will live forever on it.30 The mouth of the righteous one imparts wisdom,And his tongue speaks about justice.31 The law of his God is in his heart;His steps will not falter.32 The wicked watches the righteous,Seeking to put him to death.33 But Jehovah will not abandon him to the hand of that oneOr find him guilty when he is judged.34 Hope in Jehovah and follow his way,And he will exalt you to take possession of the earth.When the wicked are done away with, you will see it.35 I have seen the ruthless, evil manSpreading out like a luxuriant tree in its native soil.36 But he suddenly passed away and was gone;I kept searching for him, and he could not be found.37 Take note of the blameless one,And keep the upright one in sight,For the future of that man will be peaceful.38 But all the transgressors will be destroyed;The future of wicked people will be cut off.39 The salvation of the righteous is from Jehovah;He is their fortress in the time of distress.40 Jehovah will help them and rescue them.He will rescue them from the wicked and save them,Because they take refuge in him.
A melody of David, to serve as a reminder.38 O Jehovah, do not reprove me in your anger,Nor correct me in your wrath. 2 For your arrows have pierced deep into me,And your hand presses down on me. 3 My whole body is sick because of your indignation.There is no peace within my bones because of my sin. 4 For my errors loom over my head;Like a heavy burden, they are too much for me to bear. 5 My wounds stink and festerBecause of my foolishness. 6 I am distressed and extremely downcast;I walk around sad all day long. 7 There is a burning within me;My whole body is sick. 8 I have grown numb and become completely crushed;My anguished heart makes me groan aloud. 9 O Jehovah, all my desires are before you,And my sighing is not hidden from you.10 My heart pounds, my strength is gone,And the light of my eyes has left me.11 My friends and my companions avoid me because of my plague,And my close acquaintances keep their distance.12 Those seeking my life set traps;Those trying to harm me speak of ruin;They mutter deception all day long.13 But like someone deaf, I would not listen;Like someone speechless, I would not open my mouth.14 I have become like a man who cannot hear,Whose mouth has nothing to say in defense.15 For on you, O Jehovah, I waited,And you answered me, O Jehovah my God.16 For I said: “May they not gloat over meOr exalt themselves over me if my foot slips.”17 For I was ready to collapse,And my pain was always with me.18 I confessed my error;I was troubled by my sin.19 But my enemies are vigorous and mighty,Those hating me for no reason have become numerous.20 They repaid me with bad for good;They were resisting me for pursuing what is good.21 Do not abandon me, O Jehovah.O God, do not remain far away from me.22 Do hurry to help me,O Jehovah, my salvation.
To the director; of Je·duʹthun. A melody of David.39 I said: “I will guard my stepTo avoid sinning with my tongue.I will guard my mouth with a muzzleAs long as anyone wicked is in my presence.” 2 I was speechless and silent;I kept quiet even about what is good,But my pain was intense. 3 My heart smoldered inside me.As I pondered, the fire kept burning.Then my tongue spoke: 4 “O Jehovah, help me to know what my end will be,And the measure of my days,So that I may know how short my life is. 5 Indeed, you have made my days just a few;And my life span is as nothing before you.Surely every man, though he seems secure, is nothing but a mere breath. (Selah) 6 Surely every man walks about like a shadow.He rushes around for nothing.He piles up wealth, not knowing who will enjoy it. 7 What, then, can I hope for, O Jehovah?You are my only hope. 8 Save me from all my transgressions.Do not let the foolish one make me an object of contempt. 9 I remained speechless;I could not open my mouth,Because this was your doing.10 Remove your plague from me.I am worn down because your hand strikes me.11 You correct man with punishment for his error;You consume the things he treasures just as a moth does.Surely every man is but a mere breath. (Selah)12 Hear my prayer, O Jehovah,Listen to my cry for help.Do not ignore my tears.For I am but a foreign resident to you,A traveler passing through, just like all my forefathers.13 Turn your harsh gaze away from me so that I may cheer upBefore I pass away and I am gone.”
To the director; to be accompanied with stringed instruments. A melody of David.4 When I call, answer me, O my righteous God.Make a way of escape for me in my distress.Show me favor and hear my prayer. 2 You sons of men, how long will you turn my honor into humiliation?How long will you love what is worthless and search for what is false? (Selah) 3 Know that Jehovah will treat his loyal one in a special way;Jehovah will hear when I call to him. 4 Be agitated, but do not sin.Have your say in your heart, upon your bed, and keep silent. (Selah) 5 Offer the sacrifices of righteousness,And trust in Jehovah. 6 There are many saying: “Who will show us anything good?”Let the light of your face shine upon us, O Jehovah. 7 You have filled my heart with greater rejoicingThan those who have an abundant harvest of grain and new wine. 8 I will lie down and sleep in peace,For you alone, O Jehovah, make me dwell in security.
To the director. Of David. A melody.40 I earnestly hoped in Jehovah,And he inclined his ear to me and heard my cry for help. 2 He brought me up out of a roaring pit,Out of the slimy mire.And he set my feet upon a crag;He made my footing secure. 3 Then he put a new song in my mouth,Praise to our God.Many will look on in aweAnd put their trust in Jehovah. 4 Happy is the man who trusts in JehovahAnd who does not look to the defiant or to those who are false. 5 How many things you have done,O Jehovah my God,Your wonderful works and your thoughts toward us.None can compare to you;If I were to try to tell and speak of them,They would be too numerous to recount! 6 Sacrifice and offering you did not desire,But you opened up my ears to hear.You did not ask for burnt offerings and sin offerings. 7 Then I said: “Look, I have come.In the scroll it is written about me. 8 To do your will, O my God, is my delight,And your law is deep within me. 9 I proclaim the good news of righteousness in the great congregation.Look! I do not restrain my lips,O Jehovah, as you well know.10 I do not cover over your righteousness in my heart.I declare your faithfulness and salvation.I do not hide your loyal love and your truth in the great congregation.”11 O Jehovah, do not withhold your mercy from me.May your loyal love and your truth constantly safeguard me.12 The calamities surrounding me are too many to count.So many of my errors overwhelm me that I cannot see my way;They are more numerous than the hairs of my head,And I have lost heart.13 Please be willing, O Jehovah, to save me.O Jehovah, hurry to help me.14 May all those seeking to take my lifeBe put to shame and disgraced.May those who delight in my calamityRetreat in humiliation.15 May those who are saying to me: “Aha! Aha!”Be appalled because of their own shame.16 But let those seeking youExult and rejoice in you.May those who love your acts of salvation always say:“May Jehovah be magnified.”17 But I am helpless and poor;May Jehovah pay attention to me.You are my helper and my rescuer;My God, do not delay.
To the director. A melody of David.41 Happy is anyone who shows consideration to the lowly one;Jehovah will rescue him in the day of calamity. 2 Jehovah will guard him and keep him alive.He will be pronounced happy in the earth;You will never turn him over to the will of his enemies. 3 Jehovah will sustain him on his sickbed;During his sickness you will completely change his bed. 4 For I said: “O Jehovah, show me favor.Heal me, for I have sinned against you.” 5 But my enemies speak evil about me:“When will he die and his name perish?” 6 If one of them comes to see me, his heart speaks falsely.He gathers something harmful to say;Then he goes out and spreads it abroad. 7 All those who hate me whisper to one another;They are scheming something bad against me: 8 “A dreadful thing has overtaken him;Now that he is down, he will not rise again.” 9 Even the man at peace with me, one whom I trusted,Who was eating my bread, has lifted his heel against me.10 But you, O Jehovah, show me favor and raise me up,So that I may repay them.11 By this I will know that you are pleased with me:When my enemy cannot shout in triumph over me.12 As for me, you uphold me because of my integrity;You will keep me in your presence forever.13 May Jehovah, the God of Israel, be praisedThroughout all eternity.Amen and Amen.
BOOK TWO(Psalms 42-72)To the director. Masʹkil of the sons of Korʹah.42 As a deer that longs for streams of water,So I long for you, O God. 2 I do thirst for God, for the living God.When may I come and appear before God? 3 My tears are my food day and night;All day long people taunt me: “Where is your God?” 4 These things I remember, and I pour out my soul,For I once walked along with the multitude;I used to walk solemnly before them to the house of God,With sounds of rejoicing and thanksgiving,Those of a crowd celebrating a festival. 5 Why am I in despair?Why is this turmoil within me?Wait for God,For I will yet praise him as my Grand Savior. 6 My God, I am in despair.That is why I remember you,From the land of Jordan and the peaks of Herʹmon,From Mount Mi·zarʹ. 7 Deep waters call to deep watersAt the sound of your waterfalls.All your surging waves have overwhelmed me. 8 By day Jehovah will grant me his loyal love,And by night his song will be with me—a prayer to the God of my life. 9 I will say to God, my crag:“Why have you forgotten me?Why should I walk about sad because of the oppression by my enemy?”10 With murderous hostility my enemies taunt me;All day long they taunt me: “Where is your God?”11 Why am I in despair?Why is this turmoil within me?Wait for God,For I will yet praise him as my Grand Savior and my God.
43 Judge me, O God,Defend my legal case against a disloyal nation.Rescue me from the man of deception and unrighteousness. 2 For you are my God, my fortress.Why have you cast me off?Why must I walk about sad because of the oppression by my enemy? 3 Send out your light and your truth.May these lead me;May they guide me to your holy mountain and to your grand tabernacle. 4 Then I will come to the altar of God,To God, my exceeding joy.And I will praise you with the harp, O God, my God. 5 Why am I in despair?Why is this turmoil within me?Wait for God,For I will yet praise him as my Grand Savior and my God.
To the director. Of the sons of Korʹah. Masʹkil.44 O God, we have heard with our own ears,Our forefathers have recounted to us,The deeds you accomplished in their days,In the days of long ago. 2 With your hand you drove away nationsAnd settled our forefathers there.You crushed nations and drove them out. 3 It was not by their own sword that they took possession of the land,And their own arm did not bring them victory.Rather, it was by your right hand and your arm and the light of your face,For you took pleasure in them. 4 You are my King, O God;Command complete victory for Jacob. 5 By your power we will drive back our adversaries;In your name we will trample down those who rise up against us. 6 For I do not trust in my bow,And my sword cannot save me. 7 It was you who saved us from our adversaries,You who humiliated those who hate us. 8 To God we will offer praise all day long,And we will give thanks to your name forever. (Selah) 9 But now you have cast us off and humiliated us,And you do not go out with our armies.10 You keep making us retreat from our adversary;Those who hate us take whatever they want.11 You hand us over to be devoured like sheep;You have scattered us among the nations.12 You sell your people for next to nothing;You make no profit from the sale.13 You make us a reproach to our neighbors,An object of ridicule and jeering to those all around us.14 You make us an object of scorn among the nations,Something for the peoples to shake their heads at.15 I feel humiliated all day long,And I am overwhelmed by my shame,16 On account of the sound of their taunts and insults,Because of our enemy who is taking revenge.17 All of this has come upon us, yet we have not forgotten you,And we have not violated your covenant.18 Our heart has not deviated;Our footsteps do not stray from your path.19 But you have crushed us where the jackals dwell;You have covered us with deep shadow.20 If we have forgotten the name of our GodOr if we spread out our hands in prayer to a foreign god,21 Will not God discover this?He is aware of the secrets of the heart.22 For your sake we are being put to death all day long;We have been accounted as sheep for slaughtering.23 Rouse yourself. Why do you keep sleeping, O Jehovah?Awake! Do not keep casting us off forever.24 Why do you hide your face?Why do you forget our affliction and our oppression?25 For we have been brought down to the dust;Our bodies are pressed to the ground.26 Rise up as our helper!Rescue us because of your loyal love.
To the director; set to “The Lilies.” Of the sons of Korʹah. Masʹkil. A song of love.45 My heart is stirred by something good.I say: “My song is about a king.”May my tongue be the stylus of a skilled copyist. 2 You are the most handsome of the sons of men.Gracious speech flows from your lips.That is why God has blessed you forever. 3 Strap your sword on your side, O mighty one,In your dignity and your splendor. 4 And in your splendor go on to victory;Ride in the cause of truth and humility and righteousness,And your right hand will accomplish awe-inspiring things. 5 Your arrows are sharp, making peoples fall before you;They pierce the hearts of the king’s enemies. 6 God is your throne forever and ever;The scepter of your kingdom is a scepter of uprightness. 7 You loved righteousness, and you hated wickedness.That is why God, your God, has anointed you with the oil of exultation more than your companions. 8 All your garments are scented with myrrh and aloeswood and cassia;From the grand ivory palace, stringed instruments make you rejoice. 9 The daughters of kings are among your ladies of honor.The royal consort has taken her stand at your right hand, adorned in gold of Oʹphir.10 Listen, O daughter, pay attention and incline your ear;Forget your people and your father’s house.11 And the king will long for your beauty,For he is your lord,So bow down to him.12 The daughter of Tyre will come with a gift;The wealthiest of men will seek your favor.13 Inside the palace the king’s daughter is absolutely magnificent;Her clothing is adorned with gold.14 She will be brought to the king in richly woven garments.The virgin companions following her are brought in before you.15 They will be brought with rejoicing and joy;They will enter into the king’s palace.16 Your sons will take the place of your forefathers.You will appoint them as princes in all the earth.17 I will make your name known throughout all generations to come.That is why peoples will praise you forever and ever.
To the director. Of the sons of Korʹah. According to the Alʹa·moth style. A song.46 God is our refuge and strength,A help that is readily found in times of distress. 2 That is why we will not fear, though the earth undergoes change,Though the mountains topple into the depths of the sea, 3 Though its waters roar and foam over,Though the mountains rock on account of its turbulence. (Selah) 4 There is a river the streams of which make the city of God rejoice,The holy grand tabernacle of the Most High. 5 God is in the city; it cannot be overthrown.God will come to its aid at the break of dawn. 6 The nations were in an uproar, the kingdoms were overthrown;He raised his voice, and the earth melted. 7 Jehovah of armies is with us;The God of Jacob is our secure refuge. (Selah) 8 Come and witness the activities of Jehovah,How he has done astonishing things on the earth. 9 He is bringing an end to wars throughout the earth.He breaks the bow and shatters the spear;He burns the military wagons with fire.10 “Give in and know that I am God.I will be exalted among the nations;I will be exalted in the earth.”11 Jehovah of armies is with us;The God of Jacob is a secure refuge for us. (Selah)
To the director. Of the sons of Korʹah. A melody.47 All you peoples, clap your hands.Shout in triumph to God with joyful cries. 2 For Jehovah the Most High is awe-inspiring;He is the great King over all the earth. 3 He subdues peoples under us;He puts nations under our feet. 4 He chooses our inheritance for us,The pride of Jacob, whom he loves. (Selah) 5 God has ascended amid joyful shouting;Jehovah, amid the sound of the horn. 6 Sing praises to God, sing praises.Sing praises to our King, sing praises. 7 For God is King of all the earth;Sing praises, and show insight. 8 God has become King over the nations.God sits on his holy throne. 9 The leaders of the peoples have gathered togetherWith the people of the God of Abraham.For the rulers of the earth belong to God.He is highly exalted.
A song. A melody of the sons of Korʹah.48 Jehovah is great and most worthy of praiseIn the city of our God, in his holy mountain. 2 Beautiful in its loftiness, the joy of the whole earth,Is Mount Zion in the far north,The city of the Grand King. 3 In her fortified towers,God has made known that he is a secure refuge. 4 For look! kings have assembled;Together they have advanced. 5 When they saw it, they were amazed.They panicked and fled in terror. 6 Trembling seized them there,Anguish like that of a woman giving birth. 7 With an east wind you wreck the ships of Tarʹshish. 8 What we heard about, we have now seen for ourselvesIn the city of Jehovah of armies, in the city of our God.God will firmly establish it forever. (Selah) 9 We ponder your loyal love, O God,Within your temple.10 Like your name, O God, your praiseReaches to the ends of the earth.Your right hand is filled with righteousness.11 May Mount Zion rejoice,May the towns of Judah be joyful, because of your judgments.12 March around Zion; go all around it;Count its towers.13 Set your hearts upon its ramparts.Inspect its fortified towers,So that you may tell about it to future generations.14 For this God is our God forever and ever.He will guide us forevermore.
To the director. Of the sons of Korʹah. A melody.49 Hear this, all you peoples.Pay attention, all you inhabitants of the world, 2 Both small and great,Rich and poor alike. 3 My own mouth will speak wisdom,And the meditation of my heart will show understanding. 4 I will pay attention to a proverb;I will expound my riddle with the harp. 5 Why should I fear during times of trouble,When I am surrounded by the evil of those trying to overthrow me? 6 Those who are trusting in their wealthAnd who boast about their great riches, 7 None of them can ever redeem a brotherOr give to God a ransom for him, 8 (The ransom price for their life is so preciousThat it is always beyond their reach); 9 That he should live forever and not see the pit.10 He sees that even wise people die;The stupid and the unreasoning perish together,And they must leave their wealth to others.11 Their inner wish is that their houses will last forever,Their tents to generation after generation.They have named their estates after themselves.12 But man, although honored, will not remain;He is no better than the beasts that perish.13 This is the way of the stupid onesAnd of those who follow them, who take pleasure in their empty words. (Selah)14 They are assigned like sheep to the Grave.Death will shepherd them;The upright will rule over them in the morning.Every trace of them will fade away;The Grave rather than a palace will be their home.15 But God will redeem me from the power of the Grave,For he will take hold of me. (Selah)16 Do not be afraid because a man becomes rich,Because the splendor of his house increases,17 For when he dies he can take nothing with him;His splendor will not go down with him.18 For during his lifetime he congratulates himself.(People praise you when you prosper.)19 But he finally joins the generation of his forefathers.They will never again see the light.20 A man who does not understand this, although honored,Is no better than the beasts that perish.
To the director for Neʹhi·loth. A melody of David.5 Listen to my words, O Jehovah;Be attentive to my sighing. 2 Pay attention to my cry for help,O my King and my God, because to you I pray. 3 O Jehovah, you will hear my voice in the morning;In the morning I will express my concern to you and wait expectantly. 4 For you are not a God who takes pleasure in wickedness;No one bad may remain with you. 5 No arrogant person may stand in your presence.You hate all those who behave wickedly; 6 You will destroy those who speak lies.Jehovah detests violent and deceptive people. 7 But I will come into your house because of your great loyal love;I will bow down toward your holy temple in reverential fear of you. 8 Lead me, O Jehovah, in your righteousness because of my foes;Make your way clear for me. 9 For nothing they say can be trusted;Within them is nothing but malice;Their throat is an open grave;They flatter with their tongue.10 But God will declare them guilty;Their own schemes will cause their downfall.May they be driven away because of their many transgressions,For they have rebelled against you.11 But all those who take refuge in you will rejoice;They will always shout joyfully.You will block approach to them,And those loving your name will rejoice in you.12 For you will bless anyone righteous, O Jehovah;You will surround them with approval as with a large shield.
A melody of Aʹsaph.50 The God of gods, Jehovah, has spoken;He summons the earthFrom the rising of the sun until its setting. 2 Out of Zion, the perfection of beauty, God shines forth. 3 Our God will come and cannot remain silent.Before him is a consuming fire,And a great storm rages all around him. 4 He summons the heavens above and the earth,So as to judge his people: 5 “Gather to me my loyal ones,Those making a covenant with me over sacrifice.” 6 The heavens proclaim his righteousness,For God himself is Judge. (Selah) 7 “Listen, O my people, and I will speak;Israel, I will bear witness against you.I am God, your God. 8 I do not reprove you because of your sacrifices,Nor because of your whole burnt offerings that are constantly before me. 9 I do not need to take a bull from your house,Nor goats from your pens.10 For every wild animal of the forest is mine,Even the beasts upon a thousand mountains.11 I know every bird of the mountains;The countless animals of the field are mine.12 If I were hungry, I would not tell you,For the productive land and everything in it is mine.13 Will I eat the flesh of bullsAnd drink the blood of goats?14 Offer thanksgiving as your sacrifice to God,And pay your vows to the Most High;15 Call on me in the time of distress.I will rescue you, and you will glorify me.”16 But God will say to the wicked:“What right do you have to relate my regulationsOr to speak about my covenant?17 For you hate discipline,And you keep turning your back on my words.18 When you see a thief, you approve of him,And you keep company with adulterers.19 You use your mouth to spread what is bad,And deception is attached to your tongue.20 You sit and speak against your own brother;You reveal the faults of your own mother’s son.21 When you did these things, I remained silent,So you thought that I would be just like you.But now I will reprove you,And I will state my case against you.22 Please consider this, you who forget God,So that I may not tear you to pieces with no one to rescue you.23 The one who offers thanksgiving as his sacrifice glorifies me,And as for the one who follows a set course,I will cause him to see salvation by God.”
To the director. A melody of David, when Nathan the prophet came in to him after David had relations with Bath-sheʹba.51 Show me favor, O God, according to your loyal love.Blot out my transgressions according to your great mercy. 2 Thoroughly wash me from my error,And cleanse me from my sin. 3 For I am well-aware of my transgressions,And my sin is always before me. 4 Against you—you above all—I have sinned;What is bad in your eyes I have done.Therefore, you are righteous when you speak,You are right in your judgment. 5 Look! I was born guilty of error,And my mother conceived me in sin. 6 Look! You find pleasure in truth in the inner person;Teach my innermost self true wisdom. 7 Purify me from my sin with hyssop, so that I will be clean;Wash me, so that I will be whiter than snow. 8 Let me hear sounds of joy and rejoicing,So that the bones you crushed will rejoice. 9 Turn your face away from my sins,And wipe away all my errors.10 Create in me a pure heart, O God,And put within me a new spirit, a steadfast one.11 Do not cast me out from your presence;And do not take your holy spirit away from me.12 Restore to me the joy of your salvation;Stir within me a willingness to obey you.13 I will teach transgressors your ways,So that sinners will return to you.14 Save me from bloodguilt, O God, the God of my salvation,So that my tongue may joyfully declare your righteousness.15 O Jehovah, open my lips,So that my mouth may declare your praise.16 For you do not want a sacrifice—otherwise I would give it;You do not find delight in a whole burnt offering.17 The sacrifices pleasing to God are a broken spirit;A heart broken and crushed, O God, you will not reject.18 In your goodwill do what is good for Zion;Build up the walls of Jerusalem.19 Then you will take delight in the sacrifices of righteousness,The burnt sacrifices and the whole offerings;Then bulls will be offered up on your altar.
To the director. Masʹkil. Of David, when Doʹeg the Eʹdom·ite came and told Saul that David had come to the house of A·himʹe·lech.52 Why do you boast about your evil acts, you mighty one?The loyal love of God lasts all day long. 2 Your tongue, as sharp as a razor,Schemes harm and works deceitfully. 3 You love evil more than what is good,Lying more than speaking what is right. (Selah) 4 You love every harmful word,O you deceitful tongue! 5 That is why God will pull you down once and for all;He will snatch you up and tear you away from your tent;He will uproot you from the land of the living. (Selah) 6 The righteous ones will see it and be filled with awe,And they will laugh at him. 7 “Here is a man who did not make God his refuge,But he trusted in his great richesAnd relied on his own evil plots.” 8 But I will be like a luxuriant olive tree in God’s house;My trust is in God’s loyal love, forever and ever. 9 I will praise you forever because you have taken action;In the presence of your loyal ones,I will hope in your name, for it is good.
To the director; in the style of Maʹha·lath. Masʹkil. Of David.53 The foolish one says in his heart:“There is no Jehovah.”Their unrighteous actions are corrupt and detestable;No one is doing good. 2 But God looks down from heaven on the sons of menTo see whether anyone has insight, whether anyone is seeking Jehovah. 3 They have all turned away;They are all alike corrupt.No one is doing good,Not even one. 4 Do none of the wrongdoers understand?They devour my people as if they were eating bread.They do not call on Jehovah. 5 But they will be filled with great terror,Terror they have never felt before,For God will scatter the bones of those attacking you.You will put them to shame, for Jehovah has rejected them. 6 O that Israel’s salvation may come from Zion!When Jehovah gathers back his captive people,Let Jacob be joyful, let Israel rejoice.
To the director; to be accompanied with stringed instruments. Masʹkil. Of David, when the Ziphʹites came in and said to Saul: “David is hiding among us.”54 O God, save me by your name,And defend me with your power. 2 O God, hear my prayer;Pay attention to the words of my mouth. 3 For strangers rise up against me,And ruthless men seek my life.They have no regard for God. (Selah) 4 Look! God is my helper;Jehovah is with those supporting me. 5 He will repay my foes with their own evil;In your faithfulness, put an end to them. 6 I will sacrifice to you willingly.I will praise your name, O Jehovah, for it is good. 7 For he saves me from every distress,And I will look in triumph on my enemies.
To the director; to be accompanied with stringed instruments. Masʹkil. Of David.55 Listen to my prayer, O God,And do not ignore my request for mercy. 2 Do pay attention to me and answer me.My concern makes me restless,And I am distraught 3 Because of what the enemy is sayingAnd the pressure from the wicked one.For they heap trouble upon me,And in anger they harbor animosity against me. 4 My heart is in anguish within me,And the terrors of death overwhelm me. 5 Fear and trembling come upon me,And shuddering grips me. 6 I keep saying: “If only I had wings like a dove!I would fly away and reside in safety. 7 Look! I would flee far away.I would lodge in the wilderness. (Selah) 8 I would hurry to a place of shelterAway from the raging wind, away from the storm.” 9 Confuse them, O Jehovah, and frustrate their plans,For I have seen violence and conflict in the city.10 Day and night they walk around on its walls;Within it are malice and trouble.11 Ruin is in its midst;Oppression and deception never depart from its public square.12 For it is not an enemy who taunts me;Otherwise I could put up with it.It is not a foe who has risen up against me;Otherwise I could conceal myself from him.13 But it is you, a man like me,My own companion whom I know well.14 We used to enjoy a warm friendship together;Into the house of God we used to walk along with the multitude.15 May destruction overtake them!Let them go down alive into the Grave;For evil resides among them and within them.16 As for me, I will call out to God,And Jehovah will save me.17 Evening and morning and noontime, I am troubled and I groan,And he hears my voice.18 He will rescue me and give me peace from those fighting against me,For multitudes come against me.19 God will hear and respond to them,The one who sits enthroned from of old. (Selah)They will refuse to change,Those who have not feared God.20 He attacked those at peace with him;He violated his covenant.21 His words are smoother than butter,But conflict is in his heart.His words are softer than oil,But they are drawn swords.22 Throw your burden on Jehovah,And he will sustain you.Never will he allow the righteous one to fall.23 But you, O God, will bring them down to the deepest pit.Those bloodguilty and deceitful men will not live out half their days.But as for me, I will trust in you.
To the director; set to “The Silent Dove That Is Far Away.” Of David. Mikʹtam. When the Phi·lisʹtines captured him in Gath.56 Show me favor, O God, because mortal man is attacking me.All day long they keep fighting and oppressing me. 2 My foes keep snapping at me all day long;Many arrogantly fight against me. 3 When I am afraid, I put my trust in you. 4 In God—whose word I praise—In God I put my trust; I am not afraid.What can mere man do to me? 5 All day long they hurt my interests;Their only thought is to harm me. 6 They conceal themselves to attack;They watch my every step,Hoping to take away my life. 7 Reject them because of their wickedness.Bring down the nations in your anger, O God. 8 You keep track of my wandering.Do collect my tears in your skin bottle.Are they not recorded in your book? 9 My enemies will retreat on the day that I call for help.Of this I am confident: God is on my side.10 In God—whose word I praise—In Jehovah—whose word I praise—11 In God I put my trust; I am not afraid.What can a mere human do to me?12 I am bound by my vows to you, O God;I will offer you expressions of thanksgiving.13 For you have rescued me from deathAnd prevented my feet from stumbling,So that I may walk before God in the light of the living.
To the director; set to “Do Not Bring to Ruin.” Of David. Mikʹtam. When he ran away from Saul into the cave.57 Show me favor, O God, show me favor,For I take refuge in you,And in the shadow of your wings I take refuge until the troubles pass. 2 I call to God the Most High,To the true God, who brings them to an end for me. 3 He will send help from heaven and save me.He will frustrate the one snapping at me. (Selah)God will send his loyal love and his faithfulness. 4 I am surrounded by lions;I must lie among men who want to devour me,Whose teeth are spears and arrowsAnd whose tongue is a sharp sword. 5 Be exalted above the heavens, O God;May your glory be over all the earth. 6 They have prepared a net to ensnare my feet;I am bowed down with distress.They have dug a pit ahead of me,But they fell into it themselves. (Selah) 7 My heart is steadfast, O God,My heart is steadfast.I will sing and make music. 8 Do awake, my glory.Do awake, O stringed instrument; you too, O harp.I will awaken the dawn. 9 I will praise you among the peoples, O Jehovah;I will sing praises to you among the nations.10 For your loyal love is great, as high as the heavens,And your faithfulness, up to the skies.11 Be exalted above the heavens, O God;May your glory be over all the earth.
To the director; set to “Do Not Bring to Ruin.” Of David. Mikʹtam.58 Can you speak about righteousness when you are silent?Can you judge in uprightness, you sons of men? 2 Instead, you devise unrighteousness in your heart,And your hands dispense violence in the land. 3 The wicked go astray from birth;They are wayward, liars from the time they are born. 4 Their venom is like the venom of serpents;They are deaf like the cobra that stops up its ear. 5 It will not listen to the voice of charmers,No matter how skillful their spells. 6 O God, knock the teeth out of their mouth!Break the jaws of these lions, O Jehovah! 7 May they disappear like waters that drain away.May He bend his bow and make them fall by his arrows. 8 May they be like a snail that melts away as it moves along;Like a woman’s stillborn child who never sees the sun. 9 Before your cooking pots feel the heat of the bramble,He will sweep away both the moist and the burning twig, as in a storm wind.10 The righteous one will rejoice because he has seen the vengeance;His feet will be drenched with the blood of the wicked.11 Then men will say: “Surely there is a reward for the righteous.There is indeed a God who judges in the earth.”
To the director; set to “Do Not Bring to Ruin.” Of David. Mikʹtam. When Saul sent men to watch David’s house to put him to death.59 Rescue me from my enemies, O my God;Protect me from those rising up against me. 2 Rescue me from those who act wickedly,And save me from violent men. 3 Look! They wait to ambush me;Strong men attack meBut not because I have revolted or sinned, O Jehovah. 4 Though I did no wrong, they run and prepare to attack.Do arise at my calling and see. 5 For you, O Jehovah God of armies, are the God of Israel.Awake to turn your attention to all the nations.Do not show mercy to any malicious traitors. (Selah) 6 They return each evening;They growl like dogs and prowl around the city. 7 Look what pours forth from their mouth;Their lips are like swords,For they say: “Who is listening?” 8 But you, O Jehovah, will laugh at them;You will scoff at all the nations. 9 O my Strength, I will keep watch for you;For God is my secure refuge.10 The God who shows loyal love to me will come to my aid;God will cause me to look in triumph on my foes.11 Do not kill them, so that my people may not forget.By your power make them wander about;Cause their downfall, O Jehovah, our shield.12 For the sin of their mouth, the word of their lips,May they be trapped by their pride,Because of the cursing and deception that they speak.13 Finish them off in your wrath;Finish them off, so that they are no more;Make them know that God is ruling in Jacob and to the ends of the earth. (Selah)14 Let them return in the evening;Let them growl like dogs and prowl around the city.15 Let them wander about for something to eat;Do not let them be satisfied or find a lodging place.16 But as for me, I will sing about your strength;In the morning I will joyfully tell about your loyal love.For you are my secure refugeAnd a place for me to flee in my time of distress.17 O my Strength, to you I will sing praises,For God is my secure refuge, the God who shows loyal love to me.
To the director; to be accompanied with stringed instruments tuned to Shemʹi·nith. A melody of David.6 O Jehovah, do not reprove me in your anger,And do not correct me in your rage. 2 Show me favor, O Jehovah, for I am growing weak.Heal me, O Jehovah, for my bones are shaking. 3 Yes, I am greatly disturbed,And I ask you, O Jehovah—how long will it be? 4 Return, O Jehovah, and rescue me;Save me for the sake of your loyal love. 5 For in death there is no mention of you;In the Grave, who will praise you? 6 I have grown weary with my sighing;All night long I soak my bed with tears;I flood my couch with weeping. 7 My eye is weak from my grief;It has dimmed because of all those harassing me. 8 Get away from me, all you who behave wickedly,For Jehovah will hear the sound of my weeping. 9 Jehovah will hear my request for favor;Jehovah will accept my prayer.10 All my enemies will be put to shame and dismayed;They will fall back in sudden disgrace.
To the director; set to “The Lily of Reminder.” Mikʹtam. Of David. For teaching. When he fought with Aʹram-na·ha·raʹim and Aʹram-Zoʹbah, and Joʹab returned and struck down 12,000 Eʹdom·ites in the Valley of Salt.60 O God, you rejected us; you broke through our defenses.You were angry with us; but now accept us back! 2 You caused the earth to quake; you split it open.Repair its breaches, for it is falling. 3 You caused your people to suffer hardship.You made us drink wine that makes us stagger. 4 Give a signal to those fearing youTo flee and dodge the bow. (Selah) 5 So that your loved ones may be rescued,Save us with your right hand and answer us. 6 God has spoken in his holiness:“I will exult, I will give out Sheʹchem as an inheritance,And I will measure off the Valley of Sucʹcoth. 7 Gilʹe·ad belongs to me, as does Ma·nasʹseh,And Eʹphra·im is the helmet for my head;Judah is my commander’s staff. 8 Moʹab is my washbasin.Over Eʹdom I will throw my sandal.Over Phi·lisʹti·a I will shout in triumph.” 9 Who will bring me to the besieged city?Who will lead me as far as Eʹdom?10 Is it not you, O God, who have rejected us,Our God, who no longer goes out with our armies?11 Help us in our distress,For salvation by humans is worthless.12 By God we will gain power,And he will trample on our adversaries.
To the director; to be accompanied with stringed instruments. Of David.61 Hear, O God, my cry for help.Do pay attention to my prayer. 2 From the ends of the earth I will cry out to youWhen my heart is in despair.Lead me onto a rock that is higher than I am. 3 For you are my refuge,A strong tower that protects me from the enemy. 4 I will be a guest in your tent forever;I will take refuge in the shelter of your wings. (Selah) 5 For you, O God, have heard my vows.You have given me the inheritance belonging to those who fear your name. 6 You will add days to the life of the king,And his years will be from generation to generation. 7 He will sit enthroned forever before God;Grant him loyal love and faithfulness, so that these may safeguard him. 8 Then I will sing praises to your name foreverAs I pay my vows day after day.
To the director; of Je·duʹthun. A melody of David.62 Indeed, I wait silently for God.My salvation comes from him. 2 Indeed, he is my rock and my salvation, my secure refuge;I will never be greatly shaken. 3 How long will you assault a man in order to murder him?All of you are as dangerous as a leaning wall, a stone wall ready to collapse. 4 For they consult together to topple him from his high position;They take pleasure in lying.With their mouth they bless, but inside they are cursing. (Selah) 5 Indeed, I wait silently for GodBecause my hope comes from him. 6 Indeed, he is my rock and my salvation, my secure refuge;I will never be shaken. 7 Upon God depends my salvation and my glory.My strong rock, my refuge, is God. 8 Trust in him at all times, O people.Pour out your hearts before him.God is a refuge for us. (Selah) 9 The sons of men are a mere breath,The sons of mankind are a delusion.When laid together on the scales, they are lighter than a mere breath.10 Do not trust in extortionOr put false hopes in robbery.If your wealth increases, do not set your heart on it.11 Once God has spoken, twice I have heard this:That strength belongs to God.12 Also loyal love is yours, O Jehovah,For you repay each one according to his deeds.
A melody of David, when he was in the wilderness of Judah.63 O God, you are my God, I keep looking for you.I do thirst for you.I am faint with longing for youIn a dry and parched land, where there is no water. 2 So I have looked upon you in the holy place;I have seen your strength and your glory. 3 Because your loyal love is better than life,My own lips will glorify you. 4 Thus I will praise you all my life;In your name I will lift up my hands. 5 I am satisfied with the best and choicest portion,So my mouth will praise you with joy on my lips. 6 I remember you while upon my bed;I meditate on you during the watches of the night. 7 For you are my helper,And I shout joyfully in the shadow of your wings. 8 I cling to you;Your right hand keeps fast hold on me. 9 But those who seek to destroy my lifeWill descend into the depths of the earth.10 They will be handed over to the power of the sword;They will become food for jackals.11 But the king will rejoice in God.Every person swearing by Him will exult,For the mouth of those speaking lies will be silenced.
To the director. A melody of David.64 Hear my voice, O God, as I plead.Safeguard my life from the dreadfulness of the enemy. 2 Shield me from the secret plots of wicked men,From the crowd of wrongdoers. 3 They sharpen their tongue just like a sword;They aim their cruel words like arrows, 4 To shoot at the innocent from their hiding places;They shoot at him suddenly, without fear. 5 They hold fast to their evil intent;They discuss how to hide their traps.They say: “Who will see them?” 6 They search out new ways of wrongdoing;They secretly devise their shrewd strategy;The thinking within each one’s heart is unfathomable. 7 But God will shoot at them;Suddenly they will be wounded by an arrow. 8 Their own tongue will cause their downfall;All those looking on will shake their head. 9 Then all men will become afraid,And they will proclaim what God has done,And they will have insight into his deeds.10 The righteous one will rejoice in Jehovah and take refuge in him;All the upright in heart will exult.
To the director. A melody of David. A song.65 Praise awaits you, O God, in Zion;We will pay our vows to you. 2 O Hearer of prayer, to you people of all sorts will come. 3 My errors have overwhelmed me,But you cover over our transgressions. 4 Happy is the one whom you choose and bring nearTo reside in your courtyards.We will be satisfied with the goodness of your house,Your holy temple. 5 You will answer us with awe-inspiring deeds of righteousness,O God of our salvation;You are the Confidence of all the ends of the earthAnd of those distant across the sea. 6 You firmly established the mountains by your power;You are clothed with mightiness. 7 You calm the raging seas,The crash of their waves and the turmoil of the nations. 8 The inhabitants of remote places will be awestruck by your signs;You will cause those from the sunrise to the sunset to shout joyfully. 9 You care for the earth,Making it abundantly fruitful and very rich.The stream from God is full of water;You provide grain for them,For that is how you prepared the earth.10 You drench its furrows and level off its plowed soil;You soften it with showers of rain; you bless its growth.11 You crown the year with your goodness;Your tracks overflow with abundance.12 The pastures of the wilderness keep overflowing,And the hills are clothed with joyfulness.13 The pastures are covered with flocks,And the valleys are carpeted with grain.They shout in triumph, yes, they sing.
To the director. A song. A melody.66 Shout in triumph to God, all the earth. 2 Sing praises to his glorious name.Make his praise glorious. 3 Say to God: “How awe-inspiring your works are!Because of your great power,Your enemies will cringe before you. 4 All the earth will bow down to you;They will sing praises to you;They will sing praises to your name.” (Selah) 5 Come and see the works of God.His deeds toward the sons of men are awe-inspiring. 6 He changed the sea into dry land;They crossed the river on foot.There we rejoiced in him. 7 He rules forever by his might.His eyes keep watch on the nations.Those who are stubborn should not exalt themselves. (Selah) 8 Praise our God, you peoples,And let the sound of his praise be heard. 9 He preserves us alive;He does not allow our feet to stumble.10 For you have examined us, O God;As silver is refined, so you have refined us.11 You brought us into a hunting net;You put a crushing burden upon us.12 You allowed mortal man to ride over us;We came through fire and through water;Then you brought us to a place of relief.13 I will come into your house with whole burnt offerings;I will pay my vows to you14 That my lips promisedAnd my mouth spoke when I was in distress.15 I will offer burnt offerings of fattened animals to youWith the smoke of sacrificial rams.I will offer bulls along with male goats. (Selah)16 Come and listen, all you who fear God,And I will tell you what he has done for me.17 I called to him with my mouthAnd glorified him with my tongue.18 If I had harbored anything hurtful in my heart,Jehovah would not have heard me.19 But God did hear;He paid attention to my prayer.20 Praise to God, who did not reject my prayerOr withhold his loyal love from me.
To the director; to be accompanied with stringed instruments. A melody. A song.67 God will show us favor and bless us;He will make his face shine upon us (Selah) 2 So that your way may be known throughout the earth,Your acts of salvation among all the nations. 3 Let peoples praise you, O God;Let all the peoples praise you. 4 Let nations rejoice and shout joyfully,For you will judge the peoples fairly.You will guide the nations of the earth. (Selah) 5 Let peoples praise you, O God;Let all the peoples praise you. 6 The earth will give its produce;God, our God, will bless us. 7 God will bless us,And all the ends of the earth will fear him.
To the director. Of David. A melody. A song.68 Let God rise up, let his enemies be scattered,And let those who hate him flee from before him. 2 As smoke is driven away, may you drive them away;As wax melts before the fire,So let the wicked perish before God. 3 But let the righteous rejoice;May they be overjoyed before God;May they exult with rejoicing. 4 Sing to God; sing praises to his name.Sing to the One riding through the desert plains.Jah is his name! Rejoice before him! 5 A father of the fatherless and a protector of widowsIs God in his holy dwelling. 6 God gives those who are alone a home to dwell in;He leads prisoners out into prosperity.But the stubborn must live in a parched land. 7 O God, when you led your people,When you marched through the desert, (Selah) 8 The earth quaked;Heaven poured down rain because of God;This Siʹnai quaked because of God, the God of Israel. 9 You made it rain in abundance, O God;You reinvigorated your exhausted people.10 They dwelled in your tent community;In your goodness, you provided for the poor, O God.11 Jehovah gives the command;The women proclaiming the good news are a large army.12 The kings of armies flee, they flee!She who remains at home shares in the spoil.13 Although you men were lying among the campfires,There will be the wings of a dove covered with silver,With pinions of fine gold.14 When the Almighty One scattered its kings,Snow fell in Zalʹmon.15 The mountain of Baʹshan is a mountain of God;The mountain of Baʹshan is a mountain of peaks.16 Why do you look with envy, you mountains of peaks,Toward the mountain that God has chosen as his dwelling?Indeed, Jehovah will reside there forever.17 The war chariots of God are tens of thousands, thousands upon thousands.Jehovah has come from Siʹnai into the holy place.18 You ascended on high;You carried away captives;You took gifts in the form of men,Yes, even stubborn ones, to reside among them, O Jah God.19 May Jehovah be praised, who daily carries our load,The true God of our salvation. (Selah)20 The true God is for us a God who saves;And Jehovah the Sovereign Lord provides escape from death.21 Yes, God will smash the heads of his enemies,The hairy crown of the head of anyone who continues in his guilt.22 Jehovah has said: “I will bring them back from Baʹshan;I will bring them back from the depths of the sea,23 So that your foot may be awash in bloodAnd the tongue of your dogs may have its portion from the enemies.”24 They see your processions, O God,The processions of my God, my King, into the holy place.25 The singers walk in front, the musicians playing stringed instruments after them;In between are the young women playing tambourines.26 In congregated throngs, praise God;Praise Jehovah, you who are from the Source of Israel.27 There Benjamin, the youngest, is subduing them,Also the princes of Judah with their noisy crowd,The princes of Zebʹu·lun, the princes of Naphʹta·li.28 Your God has decreed that you will be strong.Show your strength, O God, you who have acted in our behalf.29 Because of your temple at Jerusalem,Kings will bring gifts to you.30 Rebuke the wild beasts of the reeds,The assembly of bulls and their calves,Until the peoples bow down bringing pieces of silver.But he scatters the peoples who delight in war.31 Bronze articles will be brought out of Egypt;Cush will hasten to offer gifts to God.32 O kingdoms of the earth, sing to God,Sing praises to Jehovah, (Selah)33 To the one who rides the ancient heaven of heavens.Look! He thunders with his voice, his mighty voice.34 Acknowledge God’s strength.His majesty is over Israel,And his strength is in the skies.35 God is awe-inspiring from his grand sanctuary.He is the God of Israel,Who gives strength and power to the people.Praise to God.
To the director; set to “The Lilies.” Of David.69 Save me, O God, for the waters threaten my life. 2 I have sunk down into the deep mud, where there is no solid ground.I have come into deep waters,And the rushing stream has swept me away. 3 I am exhausted from calling out;My throat has become hoarse.My eyes have grown weary while waiting for my God. 4 Those hating me without causeAre more numerous than the hairs of my head.Those who would do away with me,My treacherous enemies, have become many.I was forced to hand over what I had not stolen. 5 O God, you are aware of my foolishness,And my guilt is not hidden from you. 6 May those hoping in you not be put to shame because of me,O Sovereign Lord, Jehovah of armies.May those seeking you not be humiliated because of me,O God of Israel. 7 I suffer reproach on your account;Humiliation covers my face. 8 I have become a stranger to my brothers,A foreigner to the sons of my mother. 9 Zeal for your house has consumed me,And the reproaches of those reproaching you have fallen upon me.10 When I humbled myself with fasting,I was reproached for it.11 When I made sackcloth my clothing,I became an object of scorn to them.12 I am the talk of those sitting in the city gate,And the drunkards make me the subject of their songs.13 But may my prayer come to you,O Jehovah, at an acceptable time.In your abundant loyal love, O God,Answer me with your sure acts of salvation.14 Rescue me from the mire;Do not let me sink down.Rescue me from those who hate meAnd from the deep waters.15 Do not let the rushing floodwaters sweep me away,Or let the deep swallow me,Or let the well close its mouth over me.16 Answer me, O Jehovah, for your loyal love is good.According to your abundant mercy turn toward me,17 And do not hide your face from your servant.Answer me quickly, for I am in distress.18 Come near to me and rescue me;Redeem me on account of my enemies.19 You know my reproach and my disgrace and my humiliation.You see all my foes.20 Reproach has broken my heart, and the wound is incurable.I was hoping for sympathy, but there was none,And for comforters, but I found none.21 But for food they gave me poison,And for my thirst they gave me vinegar to drink.22 Let their table become a trap for them,And their prosperity, a snare.23 Let their eyes become darkened so that they cannot see,And make their hips tremble constantly.24 Pour out upon them your indignation,And may your burning anger overtake them.25 Let their encampment become desolate;Let there be no inhabitant in their tents.26 For they pursue the one whom you struck,And they keep recounting the pains of those you wounded.27 Add more guilt to their guilt,And may they have no share in your righteousness.28 Let them be erased from the book of the living,And may they not be enrolled among the righteous.29 But I am afflicted and in pain.May your saving power, O God, protect me.30 I will sing praises to the name of God,And I will magnify him with thanksgiving.31 This will please Jehovah more than a bull,More than a young bull with horns and hooves.32 The meek will see it and rejoice.You who are seeking God, may your hearts revive.33 For Jehovah is listening to the poor,And he will not despise his captive people.34 Let heaven and earth praise him,The seas and everything that moves in them.35 For God will save ZionAnd will rebuild the cities of Judah,And they will dwell there and possess it.36 The descendants of his servants will inherit it,And those who love his name will reside in it.
A dirge of David that he sang to Jehovah regarding the words of Cush the Benʹja·min·ite.7 O Jehovah my God, in you I have taken refuge.Save me from all those persecuting me and rescue me. 2 Otherwise they will tear me to pieces as a lion does,Carrying me off with no one to rescue me. 3 O Jehovah my God, if I am at fault in this,If I have acted unjustly, 4 If I have wronged the one doing good to me,Or if I have plundered my enemy without cause, 5 Then let an enemy pursue and overtake me;Let him trample my life down to the earthAnd cause my glory to perish in the dust. (Selah) 6 Rise up in your anger, O Jehovah;Stand up against the fury of my enemies;Awake for me, and demand that justice be done. 7 Let the nations surround you;And you will act against them from on high. 8 Jehovah will pass sentence on the peoples.Judge me, O Jehovah, according to my righteousnessAnd according to my integrity. 9 Please put an end to the evil deeds of the wicked.But establish the righteous,Since you are the righteous God who examines the hearts and the deepest emotions.10 God is my shield, the Savior of those upright in heart.11 God is a righteous Judge,And God proclaims his judgments every day.12 If anyone will not repent, He sharpens his sword;He bends his bow and makes it ready.13 He prepares his deadly weapons;He makes ready his flaming arrows.14 Look at the one who is pregnant with wickedness;He conceives trouble and gives birth to lies.15 He excavates a pit and digs it deep,But he falls into the very hole he made.16 The trouble he causes will return on his own head;His violence will fall on the crown of his head.17 I will praise Jehovah for his justice;I will sing praises to the name of Jehovah the Most High.
To the director. Of David, to serve as a reminder.70 O God, save me;O Jehovah, hurry to help me. 2 May those seeking to take my lifeBe put to shame and disgraced.May those who delight in my calamityRetreat in humiliation. 3 May those who are saying: “Aha! Aha!”Be driven back in shame. 4 But let those who are seeking youExult and rejoice in you.May those who love your acts of salvation always say:“May God be magnified!” 5 But I am helpless and poor;O God, act quickly in my behalf.You are my helper and my rescuer;O Jehovah, do not delay.
71 In you, O Jehovah, I have taken refuge.May I never be put to shame. 2 In your righteousness save me and rescue me.Incline your ear to me and save me. 3 Become for me a rock fortressWhere I can always enter.Give the command to save me,For you are my crag and my stronghold. 4 O my God, rescue me from the hand of the wicked,From the grasp of the unjust oppressor. 5 For you are my hope, O Sovereign Lord Jehovah;I have trusted in you since my youth. 6 I have depended on you from birth;It was you who took me from my mother’s womb.I praise you constantly. 7 I have become like a miracle to many,But you are my strong refuge. 8 My mouth is filled with your praise;All day long I tell about your splendor. 9 Do not cast me off in my old age;Do not abandon me when my strength fails.10 My enemies speak against me,And those seeking to take my life conspire together,11 Saying: “God has abandoned him.Chase after him and seize him, for there is no one to save him.”12 O God, do not remain far away from me.O my God, hurry to help me.13 May those who are resisting meBe put to shame and perish.May those seeking my calamityBe covered with disgrace and humiliation.14 But as for me, I will continue to wait;I will add to your praise.15 My mouth will recount your righteousness,All day long your acts of salvation,Though they are too many for me to grasp.16 I will come and tell about your mighty acts,O Sovereign Lord Jehovah;I will mention your righteousness, yours alone.17 O God, you have taught me from my youth,And until now I keep declaring your wonderful works.18 Even when I am old and gray, O God, do not abandon me.Let me tell the next generation about your powerAnd about your mightiness to all those who are to come.19 Your righteousness, O God, reaches to the heights;You have done great things;O God, who is like you?20 Though you have made me experience much distress and calamity,Revive me again;Bring me up from the depths of the earth.21 May you increase my greatnessAnd surround and comfort me.22 Then I will praise you on a stringed instrumentBecause of your faithfulness, O my God.I will sing your praises with the harp,O Holy One of Israel.23 My lips will shout joyfully as I sing praises to you,For you have saved my life.24 My tongue will speak about your righteousness all day long,For those seeking my destruction will be ashamed and disgraced.
Regarding Solomon.72 O God, give your judgments to the king,And endow the son of the king with your righteousness. 2 May he plead the cause of your people with righteousness,And of your lowly ones with justice. 3 May the mountains bring peace to the people,And may the hills bring righteousness. 4 Let him defend the lowly among the people,Let him save the sons of the poor,And let him crush the defrauder. 5 They will fear you as long as there is a sunAnd as long as the moon remains,For generation after generation. 6 He will be like the rain that falls on the mown grass,Like showers of rain that water the earth. 7 In his days the righteous will flourish,And peace will abound until the moon is no more. 8 He will have subjects from sea to seaAnd from the River to the ends of the earth. 9 The desert dwellers will bow down before him,And his enemies will lick the dust.10 The kings of Tarʹshish and of the islands will pay tribute.The kings of Sheʹba and of Seʹba will present gifts.11 All the kings will bow down before him,And all the nations will serve him.12 For he will rescue the poor who cry for help,Also the lowly one and whoever has no helper.13 He will have pity on the lowly and the poor,And the lives of the poor he will save.14 From oppression and from violence he will rescue them,And their blood will be precious in his eyes.15 May he live and be given the gold of Sheʹba.May prayers be said for him continually,And may he be blessed all day long.16 There will be an abundance of grain on the earth;On the top of the mountains it will overflow.His fruit will flourish as in Lebʹa·non,And in the cities people will blossom like the vegetation of the earth.17 May his name endure forever,And may it prosper as long as the sun.May people obtain a blessing for themselves by means of him;May all nations pronounce him happy.18 May Jehovah God be praised, Israel’s God,Who alone does wonderful things.19 May his glorious name be praised forever,And may his glory fill the whole earth.Amen and Amen.20 This completes the prayers of David, the son of Jesʹse.
BOOK THREE(Psalms 73-89)A melody of Aʹsaph.73 God is truly good to Israel, to those pure in heart. 2 As for me, my feet had almost strayed;My steps had nearly slipped. 3 For I became envious of the arrogantWhen I would see the peace of the wicked. 4 For they have no pain in their death;Their bodies are healthy. 5 They are not troubled like other humans,Nor do they suffer like other men. 6 Therefore, haughtiness is their necklace;Violence clothes them as a garment. 7 Their prosperity makes their eyes bulge;They have exceeded the imaginations of the heart. 8 They scoff and say evil things.They arrogantly threaten oppression. 9 They speak as if they were as high as heaven,And their tongues swagger about in the earth.10 So his people turn aside to them,And they drink from their abundant water.11 They say: “How does God know?Does the Most High really have knowledge?”12 Yes, these are the wicked, who always have it easy.They keep increasing their wealth.13 Surely in vain I have kept my heart pureAnd washed my hands in innocence.14 And I was troubled all day long;Every morning I was chastised.15 But if I had said these things,I would have betrayed your people.16 When I tried to understand it,It was troubling to me17 Until I entered the grand sanctuary of God,And I discerned their future.18 Surely you place them on slippery ground.You make them fall to their ruin.19 How suddenly they are devastated!How sudden is their finish as they come to a terrible end!20 Like a dream when one wakes up, O Jehovah,When you rouse yourself, you will dismiss their image.21 But my heart was sour,And deep inside I felt sharp pain.22 I was unreasoning and lacked understanding;I was like a senseless beast before you.23 But now I am continually with you;You have taken hold of my right hand.24 You guide me with your advice,And afterward you will lead me to glory.25 Whom do I have in the heavens?And besides you I desire nothing on earth.26 My body and my heart may fail,But God is the rock of my heart and my portion forever.27 Truly, those keeping far from you will perish.You will put an end to everyone who immorally leaves you.28 But as for me, drawing near to God is good for me.I have made the Sovereign Lord Jehovah my refuge,To declare all your works.
A masʹkil. Of Aʹsaph.74 Why, O God, have you rejected us forever?Why does your anger burn against the flock of your pasture? 2 Remember the people you acquired long ago,The tribe you redeemed as your inheritance.Remember Mount Zion, where you have resided. 3 Direct your steps to the perpetual ruins.The enemy has devastated everything in the holy place. 4 Your foes roared inside your meeting place.They have set up their own banners as signs there. 5 They were like men wielding axes against a thick forest. 6 They broke up all its engravings with axes and iron bars. 7 They set your sanctuary on fire.They profaned the tabernacle bearing your name, casting it to the ground. 8 They and their offspring have said in their hearts:“All the meeting places of God in the land must be burned.” 9 There are no signs for us to see;There is no longer any prophet,And no one among us knows how long this will last.10 How long, O God, will the adversary keep taunting?Will the enemy treat your name with disrespect forever?11 Why do you hold back your hand, your right hand?Draw it out of your bosom and put an end to them.12 But God is my King from long ago,The one performing acts of salvation on the earth.13 You stirred up the sea with your strength;You smashed the heads of the sea monsters in the waters.14 You crushed the heads of Le·viʹa·than;You gave it as food to the people, to those inhabiting the deserts.15 You cut openings for the springs and the streams;You dried up ever-flowing rivers.16 The day belongs to you, also the night.You made the light and the sun.17 You set up all the boundaries of the earth;You made summer and winter.18 Remember the enemy’s taunts, O Jehovah,How a foolish people treats your name with disrespect.19 Do not surrender the life of your turtledove to the wild beasts.Do not forget the life of your afflicted people forever.20 Remember the covenant,For the dark places of the earth have become full of the haunts of violence.21 May the crushed one not turn away disappointed;May the lowly and the poor praise your name.22 Rise up, O God, and plead your legal case.Remember how the foolish taunt you all day long.23 Do not forget what your foes are saying.The uproar of those who defy you is ascending constantly.
To the director. Set to the melody “Do Not Bring to Ruin.” Of Aʹsaph. A song.75 We give thanks to you, O God, we give thanks to you;Your name is near,And people declare your wondrous works. 2 You say: “When I set a time,I judge with fairness. 3 When the earth and all its inhabitants were dissolved,It was I who kept its pillars firm.” (Selah) 4 I say to the boastful, “Do not boast,”And to the wicked, “Do not exalt your strength. 5 Do not exalt your strength up highOr speak with arrogance. 6 For exaltation does not comeFrom the east or the west or the south. 7 For God is Judge.He puts one man down and exalts another. 8 For there is a cup in Jehovah’s hand;The wine is foaming and is fully mixed.He will surely pour it out,And all the wicked of the earth will drink it, down to the dregs.” 9 But as for me, I will proclaim it forever;I will sing praises to the God of Jacob.10 For he says: “I will cut off all the strength of the wicked,But the strength of the righteous will be exalted.”
To the director; to be accompanied with stringed instruments. A melody of Aʹsaph. A song.76 God is known in Judah;In Israel his name is great. 2 His shelter is in Saʹlem,And his dwelling is in Zion. 3 There he broke the flaming arrows of the bow,The shield and the sword and the weapons of war. (Selah) 4 You shine brightly;You are more majestic than the mountains of prey. 5 The courageous of heart have been plundered.They have fallen asleep;The warriors were all helpless. 6 From your rebuke, O God of Jacob,Both the charioteer and the horse have fallen fast asleep. 7 You alone are awe-inspiring.Who can withstand your intense anger? 8 From heaven you pronounced judgment;The earth was afraid and was silent 9 When God rose up to execute judgment,To save all the meek of the earth. (Selah)10 For the rage of man will serve to your praise;With the remnants of their rage you will adorn yourself.11 Make your vows to Jehovah your God and pay them,Let all who are around him bring their gift in fear.12 He will humble the pride of leaders;He inspires fear in the kings of the earth.
To the director; on Je·duʹthun. Of Aʹsaph. A melody.77 With my voice I will cry out to God;To God I will cry out, and he will hear me. 2 In the day of my distress I search for Jehovah.At night my hands are stretched out to him without ceasing.I cannot be comforted. 3 When I remember God, I groan;I am troubled and my strength fails. (Selah) 4 You hold my eyelids open;I am agitated and cannot speak. 5 My thoughts turn to the days of long ago,The years of the distant past. 6 During the night I remember my song;I ponder in my heart;I make a diligent search. 7 Will Jehovah cast us off forever?Will he never again show his favor? 8 Has his loyal love ceased forever?Will his promise come to nothing for all generations? 9 Has God forgotten to show his favor,Or has his anger caused his mercy to cease? (Selah)10 Must I keep saying: “This is what distresses me:The Most High has changed his position toward us”?11 I will remember the works of Jah;I will remember your marvelous deeds of long ago.12 And I will meditate on all your activityAnd ponder over your dealings.13 O God, your ways are holy.What god is as great as you, O God?14 You are the true God, who does marvelous things.You have revealed your strength to the peoples.15 With your power you have rescued your people,The sons of Jacob and of Joseph. (Selah)16 The waters saw you, O God;The waters saw you and were disturbed.And the deep waters became agitated.17 The clouds poured down water.The cloudy skies thundered,And your arrows flew here and there.18 The sound of your thunder was like chariot wheels;Flashes of lightning lit up the inhabited earth;The earth trembled and quaked.19 Your way was through the sea,Your path through many waters;But your footprints could not be traced.20 You led your people just like a flock,In the care of Moses and Aaron.
Masʹkil. Of Aʹsaph.78 Listen, my people, to my law;Incline your ear to the words of my mouth. 2 I will open my mouth in a proverb.I will propound riddles of long ago. 3 The things we have heard and know,Which our fathers have related to us, 4 We will not hide from their sons;We will relate to the generation to comeThe praiseworthy deeds of Jehovah and his strength,The wonderful things he has done. 5 He established a reminder in JacobAnd set a law in Israel;He commanded our forefathersTo make these things known to their children, 6 So that the next generation,The children yet to be born, might know them.They in turn would relate them to their children. 7 Then these would put their confidence in God.They would not forget God’s worksBut would observe his commandments. 8 Then they would not be like their forefathers,A stubborn and rebellious generation,A generation whose heart was unsteadyAnd whose spirit was not faithful to God. 9 The Eʹphra·im·ites were armed with the bow,But they retreated in the day of battle.10 They did not keep the covenant of GodAnd refused to walk in his law.11 They also forgot what he had done,His wonderful works that he showed them.12 He did marvelous things in the sight of their forefathers,In the land of Egypt, the region of Zoʹan.13 He split the sea to let them pass through,And he made the waters stand up like a dam.14 He led them with a cloud by dayAnd the whole night with the light of a fire.15 He split rocks in the wilderness,He let them drink their fill as if from deep waters.16 He brought streams out of a cragAnd caused waters to flow down like rivers.17 But they continued to sin against himBy rebelling against the Most High in the desert;18 They challenged God in their heartBy demanding food that they craved.19 So they spoke against God,Saying: “Can God spread a table in the wilderness?”20 Look! He struck a rockSo that waters flowed and streams flooded out.“Can he also give us bread,Or can he provide meat for his people?”21 When Jehovah heard them, he became furious;A fire blazed against Jacob,And his anger flared up against Israel22 Because they did not put faith in God;They did not trust in his ability to save them.23 So he commanded the cloudy skies above,And he opened the doors of heaven.24 He kept raining down manna for them to eat;He gave them the grain of heaven.25 Men ate the bread of mighty ones;He provided enough to satisfy them.26 He stirred up the east wind in the heavensAnd made a south wind blow by his power.27 And he rained down meat on them like dust,Birds like the sand of the seashore.28 He made them fall in the midst of his camp,All around his tents.29 And they ate and gorged themselves;He gave them what they desired.30 But before they fully satisfied their craving,While their food was yet in their mouth,31 God’s wrath flared up against them.He put to death their strongest men;He brought down the young men of Israel.32 Despite this they sinned even moreAnd did not put faith in his wonderful works.33 So he brought their days to an end as if a mere breath,And their years by sudden terrors.34 But as often as he killed them, they would search for him;They would return and look for God,35 Remembering that God was their RockAnd that the Most High God was their Redeemer.36 But they tried to deceive him with their mouthAnd lied to him with their tongue.37 Their heart was not steadfast toward him;And they were not faithful to his covenant.38 But he was merciful;He would forgive their error and not bring them to ruin.He often held back his angerInstead of stirring up all his wrath.39 For he remembered that they were flesh,A wind that blows past and does not return.40 How often they rebelled against him in the wildernessAnd made him feel hurt in the desert!41 Again and again they put God to the test,And they grieved the Holy One of Israel.42 They did not remember his power,The day that he rescued them from the adversary,43 How he displayed his signs in EgyptAnd his miracles in the region of Zoʹan,44 And how he turned the Nile canals into bloodSo that they could not drink from their streams.45 He sent swarms of gadflies to devour themAnd frogs to bring them to ruin.46 He gave their crops to the voracious locusts,The fruit of their labor to the swarming locusts.47 He destroyed their vines with hailAnd their sycamore trees with hailstones.48 He gave their beasts of burden over to the hailAnd their livestock to the lightning bolts.49 He inflicted his burning anger on them,Fury and indignation and distress,Companies of angels bringing calamity.50 He cleared a pathway for his anger.He did not spare them from death;And he gave them over to pestilence.51 Finally he struck down all the firstborn of Egypt,The beginning of their procreative power in the tents of Ham.52 Then he brought his people out like a flockAnd guided them like a drove in the wilderness.53 He led them in security,And they felt no fear;The sea covered their enemies.54 And he brought them to his holy territory,This mountainous region that his right hand acquired.55 He drove out the nations from before them;He allotted to them an inheritance by the measuring line;He settled the tribes of Israel in their homes.56 But they kept challenging God the Most High, and rebelling against him;They did not pay attention to his reminders.57 They also turned away and were as treacherous as their forefathers.They were as unreliable as a loose bow.58 They kept offending him with their high places,And they incited him to fury with their carved images.59 God heard and became furious,So he utterly rejected Israel.60 He finally forsook the tabernacle of Shiʹloh,The tent where he had resided among men.61 He let the symbol of his strength go into captivity;His splendor into the hand of the adversary.62 He handed his people over to the swordAnd became furious with his inheritance.63 Fire consumed his young men,And to his virgins no wedding songs were sung.64 His priests fell by the sword,And their own widows did not weep.65 Then Jehovah woke up as from sleep,Like a mighty man waking up from wine.66 And he drove his adversaries back;He put them to lasting disgrace.67 He rejected the tent of Joseph;He did not choose the tribe of Eʹphra·im.68 But he chose the tribe of Judah,Mount Zion, which he loves.69 He made his sanctuary as enduring as the heavens,Like the earth that he has established forever.70 He chose David his servantAnd took him from the sheep pens,71 From tending the nursing ewes;He made him the shepherd over Jacob, his people,And over Israel, his inheritance.72 He shepherded them with integrity of heart,And with skillful hands he led them.
A melody of Aʹsaph.79 O God, the nations have invaded your inheritance;They have defiled your holy temple;They have turned Jerusalem into a heap of ruins. 2 They have given the dead bodies of your servants as food to the birds of the heavensAnd the flesh of your loyal ones to the wild beasts of the earth. 3 They have poured out their blood like water around Jerusalem,And no one is left to bury them. 4 We have become an object of reproach to our neighbors;Those around us ridicule and jeer us. 5 How long, O Jehovah, will you be furious? Forever?How long will your indignation burn just like fire? 6 Pour out your wrath on the nations that do not know youAnd on the kingdoms that do not call on your name. 7 For they have devoured JacobAnd have desolated his homeland. 8 Do not hold us accountable for the errors of our ancestors.Quickly show us your mercy,For we have been brought very low. 9 Help us, O God of our salvation,For the sake of your glorious name;Rescue us and forgive our sins for the sake of your name.10 Why should the nations say: “Where is their God?”Before our eyes may it become known among the nationsThat the shed blood of your servants has been avenged.11 May you hear the sighing of the prisoner.Use your great power to preserve those sentenced to death.12 Repay our neighbors sevenfoldFor the taunts they have leveled at you, O Jehovah.13 Then we, your people and the flock of your pasture,Will give thanks to you forever;And we will declare your praise from generation to generation.
To the director; upon the Gitʹtith. A melody of David.8 O Jehovah our Lord, how majestic your name is throughout the earth;You have set your splendor even higher than the heavens! 2 Out of the mouth of children and infants you have established strengthOn account of your adversaries,To silence the enemy and the avenger. 3 When I see your heavens, the works of your fingers,The moon and the stars that you have prepared, 4 What is mortal man that you keep him in mind,And a son of man that you take care of him? 5 You made him a little lower than godlike ones,And you crowned him with glory and splendor. 6 You gave him dominion over the works of your hands;You have put everything under his feet: 7 All the flocks and cattle,As well as the wild animals, 8 The birds of the heavens and the fish of the sea,Whatever passes through the paths of the seas. 9 O Jehovah our Lord, how majestic your name is throughout the earth!
To the director; set to “The Lilies.” A reminder. Of Aʹsaph. A melody.80 O Shepherd of Israel, listen,You who are guiding Joseph just like a flock.You who sit enthroned above the cherubs,Shine forth. 2 Before Eʹphra·im and Benjamin and Ma·nasʹseh,Do stir up your mightiness;Come and save us. 3 O God, restore us;Let your face shine upon us, so that we may be saved. 4 Jehovah God of armies, how long will you be hostile toward the prayer of your people? 5 You feed them tears as their bread,And you make them drink tears beyond measure. 6 You let our neighbors quarrel over us;Our enemies keep mocking us as they please. 7 O God of armies, restore us;Let your face shine upon us, so that we may be saved. 8 You made a vine depart from Egypt.You drove out the nations and planted it. 9 You cleared a space for it,And it took root and filled the land.10 The mountains were covered by its shadow,And the cedars of God by its branches.11 Its branches reached as far as the sea,And its shoots to the River.12 Why have you broken down the stone walls of the vineyard,So that all those passing by pluck its fruit?13 The boars of the forest ravage it,And the wild animals of the field feed on it.14 O God of armies, please return.Look down from heaven and see!Take care of this vine,15 The stock that your right hand has planted,And look upon the son whom you made strong for yourself.16 It is burned with fire, cut down.They perish at your rebuke.17 May your hand give support to the man at your right hand,To the son of man you have made strong for yourself.18 Then we will not turn away from you.Preserve us alive, so that we may call on your name.19 O Jehovah God of armies, restore us;Let your face shine upon us, so that we may be saved.
To the director; upon the Gitʹtith. Of Aʹsaph.81 Shout joyfully to God our strength.Shout in triumph to the God of Jacob. 2 Begin the music and take a tambourine,The melodious harp together with the stringed instrument. 3 Blow the horn on the new moon,On the full moon, for the day of our festival. 4 For it is a decree for Israel,A ruling of the God of Jacob. 5 He established it as a reminder for JosephWhen He went out against the land of Egypt.I heard a voice that I did not recognize: 6 “I lifted the burden from his shoulder;His hands were freed from the basket. 7 In your distress you called, and I rescued you;I answered you from the thundercloud.I tested you at the waters of Merʹi·bah. (Selah) 8 Hear, my people, and I will testify against you.O Israel, if you would only listen to me. 9 Among you, there will be no strange god,And you will not bow down to a foreign god.10 I, Jehovah, am your God,The one who brought you out of the land of Egypt.Open your mouth wide, and I will fill it.11 But my people did not listen to my voice;Israel would not submit to me.12 So I let them follow their stubborn hearts;They did what they thought was right.13 If only my people would listen to me,If only Israel would walk in my ways!14 Their enemies I would quickly subdue;I would turn my hand against their adversaries.15 Those who hate Jehovah will cringe in his presence,And their outcome will be forever.16 But he will feed you with the finest wheatAnd satisfy you with honey from the rock.”
A melody of Aʹsaph.82 God takes his place in the divine assembly;In the middle of the gods he judges: 2 “How long will you continue to judge with injusticeAnd show partiality to the wicked? (Selah) 3 Defend the lowly and the fatherless.Render justice to the helpless and destitute. 4 Rescue the lowly and the poor;Save them out of the hand of the wicked.” 5 They do not know, nor do they understand;They are walking about in darkness;All the foundations of the earth are being shaken. 6 “I have said, ‘You are gods,All of you are sons of the Most High. 7 But you will die just as men do;And like any other prince you will fall!’” 8 Rise up, O God, and judge the earth,For all the nations belong to you.
A song. A melody of Aʹsaph.83 O God, do not be silent;Do not keep quiet or still, O Divine One. 2 For look! your enemies are in an uproar;Those who hate you act arrogantly. 3 With cunning they secretly plot against your people;They conspire against your treasured ones. 4 They say: “Come, let us annihilate them as a nation,So that the name of Israel may be remembered no more.” 5 They devise a unified strategy;They have made an alliance against you— 6 The tents of Eʹdom and the Ishʹma·el·ites, Moʹab and the Hagʹrites, 7 Geʹbal and Amʹmon and Amʹa·lek,Phi·lisʹti·a together with the inhabitants of Tyre. 8 As·syrʹi·a too has joined them;They give support to the sons of Lot. (Selah) 9 Do to them as you did to Midʹi·an,As you did to Sisʹe·ra and Jaʹbin at the stream of Kiʹshon.10 They were annihilated at En-dor;They became manure for the ground.11 Make their nobles like Oʹreb and ZeʹebAnd their princes like Zeʹbah and Zal·munʹna,12 For they said: “Let us take possession of the land where God dwells.”13 O my God, make them like a whirling thistle,Like stubble blown about by the wind.14 Like a fire that burns up the forest,Like a flame that scorches the mountains,15 So may you pursue them with your tempestAnd terrify them with your windstorm.16 Cover their faces with dishonor,So that they may search for your name, O Jehovah.17 May they be put to shame and be terrified forever;May they be disgraced and perish;18 May people know that you, whose name is Jehovah,You alone are the Most High over all the earth.
For the director; upon the Gitʹtith. Of the sons of Korʹah. A melody.84 How lovely your grand tabernacle is,O Jehovah of armies! 2 My whole being yearns,Yes, I am faint with longing,For the courtyards of Jehovah.My heart and my flesh shout joyfully to the living God. 3 Even the bird finds a home thereAnd the swallow a nest for herself,Where she cares for her youngNear your grand altar, O Jehovah of armies,My King and my God! 4 Happy are those dwelling in your house!They continue to praise you. (Selah) 5 Happy are the men who find their strength in you,Whose hearts are set on the highways. 6 When they pass through the Baʹca Valley,They make it into a place of springs;And the early rain clothes it with blessings. 7 They will walk on from strength to strength;Each one appears before God in Zion. 8 O Jehovah God of armies, hear my prayer;Listen, O God of Jacob. (Selah) 9 Look, our shield and our God,Look upon the face of your anointed one.10 For a day in your courtyards is better than a thousand anywhere else!I choose to stand at the threshold of the house of my GodRather than to dwell in the tents of wickedness.11 For Jehovah God is a sun and a shield;He gives favor and glory.Jehovah will not hold back anything goodFrom those walking in integrity.12 O Jehovah of armies,Happy is the man who trusts in you.
For the director. Of the sons of Korʹah. A melody.85 You have shown favor, O Jehovah, to your land;You brought back those of Jacob who were taken captive. 2 You have pardoned the error of your people;You forgave all their sin. (Selah) 3 You held back all your fury;You turned away from your hot anger. 4 Restore us, O God of our salvation,And set aside your displeasure with us. 5 Will you be furious with us forever?Will you prolong your anger to generation after generation? 6 Will you not revive us againSo that your people may rejoice in you? 7 Show your loyal love to us, O Jehovah,And grant us your salvation. 8 I will listen to what the true God Jehovah says,For he will speak peace to his people, to his loyal ones,But let them not return to overconfidence. 9 Surely his salvation is near to those who fear him,So that his glory may reside in our land.10 Loyal love and faithfulness will meet together;Righteousness and peace will kiss each other.11 Faithfulness will sprout from the earth,And righteousness will look down from the heavens.12 Yes, Jehovah will give what is good,And our land will yield its harvest.13 Righteousness will walk before himAnd make a path for his footsteps.
A prayer of David.86 Incline your ear, O Jehovah, and answer me,For I am afflicted and poor. 2 Guard my life, for I am loyal.Save your servant who is trusting in you,For you are my God. 3 Show me favor, O Jehovah,For I call to you all day long. 4 Make your servant rejoice,For to you, O Jehovah, I turn. 5 For you, O Jehovah, are good and ready to forgive;You abound in loyal love for all those who call on you. 6 Listen, O Jehovah, to my prayer;And pay attention to my pleas for help. 7 I call on you in the day of my distress,For you will answer me. 8 There is none like you among the gods, O Jehovah,There are no works like yours. 9 All the nations that you madeWill come and bow down before you, O Jehovah,And they will give glory to your name.10 For you are great and do wondrous things;You are God, you alone.11 Instruct me, O Jehovah, about your way.I will walk in your truth.Unify my heart to fear your name.12 I praise you, O Jehovah my God, with all my heart,And I will glorify your name forever,13 For your loyal love toward me is great,And you have saved my life from the depths of the Grave.14 O God, presumptuous men rise up against me;A band of ruthless men seek to take my life,And they have no regard for you.15 But you, O Jehovah, are a God merciful and compassionate,Slow to anger and abundant in loyal love and faithfulness.16 Turn to me and show me favor.Give your strength to your servant,And save the son of your slave girl.17 Show me a sign of your goodness,So that those who hate me may see it and be put to shame.For you, O Jehovah, are my helper and comforter.
Of the sons of Korʹah. A melody. A song.87 His city’s foundation is in the holy mountains. 2 Jehovah loves the gates of ZionMore than all the tents of Jacob. 3 Glorious things are being said about you, O city of the true God. (Selah) 4 I will count Raʹhab and Babylon among those who know me;Here are Phi·lisʹti·a and Tyre, together with Cush.It will be said: “This is one who was born there.” 5 And about Zion it will be said:“Each and every one was born in her.”And the Most High will firmly establish her. 6 Jehovah will declare, when recording the peoples:“This is one who was born there.” (Selah) 7 Singers and those performing circle dances will say:“All my springs are in you.”
A song. A melody of the sons of Korʹah. To the director; in the style of Maʹha·lath, to be sung alternately. Masʹkil of Heʹman the Ezʹra·hite.88 O Jehovah, the God of my salvation,By day I cry out,And by night I come before you. 2 Let my prayer come to you,Incline your ear to my cry for help. 3 For my soul has been filled with calamity,And my life is on the brink of the Grave. 4 I am already counted among those going down to the pit;I have become a helpless man, 5 Left among the deadLike the slain lying in a grave,Whom you remember no longerAnd who have been separated from your care. 6 You have put me in the lowest pit,In dark places, in a large abyss. 7 Your rage weighs heavily on me,And you overwhelm me with your crashing waves. (Selah) 8 You have driven my acquaintances far away from me;You have made me something detestable to them.I am trapped and cannot escape. 9 My eye is worn out because of my affliction.I call on you, O Jehovah, all day long;To you I spread out my hands.10 Will you perform wonders for the dead?Can those powerless in death rise up to praise you? (Selah)11 Will your loyal love be declared in the grave,Your faithfulness in the place of destruction?12 Will your wonders be known in the darknessOr your righteousness in the land of oblivion?13 But I still cry to you for help, O Jehovah,Each morning my prayer comes before you.14 Why, O Jehovah, do you reject me?Why do you hide your face from me?15 From my youth on,I have been afflicted and ready to perish;I am numb from the terrible things you allow me to suffer.16 Your burning anger overwhelms me;Your terrors destroy me.17 They surround me like waters all day long;They close in on me from all sides.18 You have driven my friends and companions far away from me;Darkness has become my companion.
Masʹkil. Of Eʹthan the Ezʹra·hite.89 I will sing about Jehovah’s expressions of loyal love forever.With my mouth I will make known your faithfulness to all generations. 2 For I have said: “Loyal love will be built up forever,And you have firmly established your faithfulness in the heavens.” 3 “I have made a covenant with my chosen one;I have sworn to David my servant: 4 ‘I will firmly establish your offspring forever,And I will build up your throne for all generations.’” (Selah) 5 The heavens praise your marvels, O Jehovah,Yes, your faithfulness in the congregation of the holy ones. 6 For who in the skies can compare to Jehovah?Who among the sons of God is like Jehovah? 7 God is held in awe in the council of holy ones;He is grand and awe-inspiring to all who are around him. 8 O Jehovah God of armies,Who is mighty like you, O Jah?Your faithfulness surrounds you. 9 You rule over the raging of the sea;When its waves surge, you calm them.10 You have crushed Raʹhab like one who is slain.With your strong arm you have scattered your enemies.11 The heavens are yours, and the earth is yours;The productive land and what fills it—you have founded them.12 The north and the south—you created them;Taʹbor and Herʹmon joyously praise your name.13 Your arm is mighty;Your hand is strong;Your right hand is exalted.14 Righteousness and justice are the foundation of your throne;Loyal love and faithfulness stand before you.15 Happy are the people who know the joyful shouting.O Jehovah, they walk in the light of your face.16 They rejoice in your name all day long,And in your righteousness they are exalted.17 For you are the glory of their strength,And by your approval our strength is exalted.18 For our shield belongs to Jehovah,Our king belongs to the Holy One of Israel.19 At that time you spoke in a vision to your loyal ones and said:“I have granted strength to a mighty one;I have exalted a chosen one from among the people.20 I have found David my servant;With my holy oil I have anointed him.21 My hand will support him,And my arm will strengthen him.22 No enemy will exact tribute from him,And no unrighteous man will oppress him.23 I will crush to pieces his adversaries from before himAnd strike down those who hate him.24 My faithfulness and loyal love are with him,And in my name his strength will be exalted.25 I will put his hand over the seaAnd his right hand over the rivers.26 He will call out to me: ‘You are my Father,My God and the Rock of my salvation.’27 And I will place him as firstborn,The highest of the kings of the earth.28 I will maintain my loyal love for him forever,And my covenant with him will never fail.29 I will establish his offspring foreverAnd make his throne as enduring as the heavens.30 If his sons leave my lawAnd do not walk according to my decrees,31 If they violate my statutesAnd do not keep my commandments,32 Then I will punish their disobedience with a rodAnd their error with flogging.33 But I will never abandon my loyal love for himNor be untrue to my promise.34 I will not violate my covenantOr change what my lips have spoken.35 I have sworn in my holiness, once and for all;I will not tell lies to David.36 His offspring will endure forever;His throne will endure like the sun before me.37 Like the moon, it will be firmly established foreverAs a faithful witness in the skies.” (Selah)38 But you yourself have cast off and rejected him;You have become furious with your anointed one.39 You have spurned the covenant with your servant;You have profaned his crown by throwing it to the ground.40 You have broken down all his stone walls;You have reduced his fortifications to ruins.41 All who pass by have pillaged him;He is a reproach to his neighbors.42 You have made his adversaries victorious;You have caused all his enemies to rejoice.43 You have also driven back his sword,And you have made him lose ground in the battle.44 You have brought an end to his splendorAnd hurled his throne to the ground.45 You have cut short the days of his youth;You have clothed him with shame. (Selah)46 How long, O Jehovah, will you hide yourself? Will it be forever?Will your rage continue to burn like a fire?47 Remember how short my life is!Was it to no purpose that you created all humans?48 What man can live and never see death?Can he save himself from the power of the Grave? (Selah)49 Where are your former acts of loyal love, O Jehovah,That you swore about to David in your faithfulness?50 Remember, O Jehovah, the taunts hurled at your servants;How I have to bear the taunts of all the peoples;51 How your enemies have hurled insults, O Jehovah;How they have insulted every footstep of your anointed one.52 May Jehovah be praised forever. Amen and Amen.
To the director; upon Muth-labʹben. A melody of David.9 I will praise you, O Jehovah, with all my heart;I will tell about all your wonderful works. 2 I will rejoice and exult in you;I will sing praises to your name, O Most High. 3 When my enemies retreat,They will stumble and perish from before you. 4 For you defend my just cause;You sit on your throne judging with righteousness. 5 You have rebuked nations and destroyed the wicked,Blotting out their name forever and ever. 6 The enemy has been ruined forever;You uprooted their cities,And all memory of them will perish. 7 But Jehovah is enthroned forever;He has firmly established his throne for justice. 8 He will judge the inhabited earth in righteousness;He will render righteous legal decisions for the nations. 9 Jehovah will become a secure refuge for the oppressed,A secure refuge in times of distress.10 Those knowing your name will trust in you;You will never abandon those seeking you, O Jehovah.11 Sing praises to Jehovah, who is dwelling in Zion;Make his deeds known among the peoples.12 For the One who avenges their blood remembers them;He will not forget the cry of the afflicted.13 Show me favor, O Jehovah; see my affliction by those hating me,You who raise me from the gates of death,14 So that I may declare your praiseworthy deeds in the gates of the daughter of Zion,And rejoice in your acts of salvation.15 The nations have sunk down into the pit they made;Their own foot has been caught in the net they hid.16 Jehovah is known by the judgment he executes.The wicked one has been ensnared in the work of his own hands.Hig·gaʹion. (Selah)17 The wicked will retreat toward the Grave,All the nations who forget God.18 But the poor will not always be forgotten;Nor will the hope of the meek ever perish.19 Rise up, O Jehovah! Do not let mortal man prevail.May the nations be judged in your presence.20 Strike them with fear, O Jehovah,Let the nations know that they are only mortal men. (Selah)
BOOK FOUR(Psalms 90-106)A prayer of Moses, the man of the true God.90 O Jehovah, you have been our dwelling place throughout all generations. 2 Before the mountains were bornOr you brought forth the earth and the productive land,From everlasting to everlasting, you are God. 3 You make mortal man return to dust;You say: “Return, you sons of men.” 4 For a thousand years are in your eyes just as yesterday when it is past,Just as a watch during the night. 5 You sweep them away; they become like mere sleep;In the morning they are like grass that sprouts. 6 In the morning it blossoms and is renewed,But by evening it withers and dries up. 7 For we are consumed by your angerAnd terrified by your rage. 8 You place our errors in front of you;Our secrets are exposed by the light of your face. 9 Our days ebb away because of your fury;And our years come to an end like a whisper.10 The span of our life is 70 years,Or 80 if one is especially strong.But they are filled with trouble and sorrow;They quickly pass by, and away we fly.11 Who can fathom the power of your anger?Your fury is as great as the fear you deserve.12 Teach us how to count our daysSo that we may acquire a heart of wisdom.13 Return, O Jehovah! How long will this last?Have pity on your servants.14 Satisfy us with your loyal love in the morning,So that we may shout joyfully and rejoice during all our days.15 Make us rejoice in proportion to the days you have afflicted us,For as many years as we have experienced calamity.16 May your servants see your activity,And may their sons see your splendor.17 May the favor of Jehovah our God be upon us;May you prosper the work of our hands.Yes, prosper the work of our hands.
91 Anyone dwelling in the secret place of the Most HighWill lodge under the shadow of the Almighty. 2 I will say to Jehovah: “You are my refuge and my stronghold,My God in whom I trust.” 3 For he will rescue you from the trap of the birdcatcher,From the destructive pestilence. 4 With his pinions he will cover you,And under his wings you will take refuge.His faithfulness will be a large shield and a protective wall. 5 You will not fear the terrors of the night,Nor the arrow that flies by day, 6 Nor the pestilence that stalks in the gloom,Nor the destruction that ravages at midday. 7 A thousand will fall at your sideAnd ten thousand at your right hand,But to you it will not come near. 8 You will only see it with your eyesAs you witness the punishment of the wicked. 9 Because you said: “Jehovah is my refuge,”You have made the Most High your dwelling;10 No disaster will befall you,And no plague will come near your tent.11 For he will give his angels a command concerning you,To guard you in all your ways.12 They will carry you on their hands,So that you may not strike your foot against a stone.13 On the young lion and the cobra you will tread;You will trample underfoot the maned lion and the big snake.14 God said: “Because he has affection for me, I will rescue him.I will protect him because he knows my name.15 He will call on me, and I will answer him.I will be with him in distress.I will rescue him and glorify him.16 I will satisfy him with long life,And I will cause him to see my acts of salvation.”
A melody. A song for the Sabbath day.92 It is good to give thanks to JehovahAnd to sing praises to your name, O Most High, 2 To declare your loyal love in the morningAnd your faithfulness during the nights, 3 Accompanied by a ten-stringed instrument and a lute,By the melodious sound of a harp. 4 For you have made me rejoice, O Jehovah, because of your deeds;Because of the works of your hands I shout joyfully. 5 How great your works are, O Jehovah!How very deep your thoughts are! 6 No unreasoning man can know them;And no foolish person can understand this: 7 When the wicked sprout like weedsAnd all the wrongdoers flourish,It is that they may be annihilated forever. 8 But you are exalted forever, O Jehovah. 9 Indeed, look in triumph on your enemies, O Jehovah,Look at how your enemies will perish;All the wrongdoers will be scattered.10 But you will exalt my strength like that of a wild bull;I will moisten my skin with fresh oil.11 My eyes will look in triumph on my foes;My ears will hear about the downfall of the evil men who attack me.12 But the righteous will flourish like a palm treeAnd grow big like a cedar in Lebʹa·non.13 They are planted in the house of Jehovah;They flourish in the courtyards of our God.14 Even in old age they will still be thriving;They will remain vigorous and fresh,15 Declaring that Jehovah is upright.He is my Rock, in whom there is no unrighteousness.
93 Jehovah has become King!With grandeur he is clothed;Jehovah is clothed with strength;He wears it like a belt.The earth is firmly established;It cannot be moved. 2 Your throne was firmly established long ago;From eternity you have existed. 3 The rivers have surged, O Jehovah,The rivers have surged and roared;The rivers keep surging and pounding. 4 Above the sound of many waters,Mightier than the breaking waves of the sea,Jehovah is majestic in the heights. 5 Your reminders are very trustworthy.Holiness adorns your house, O Jehovah, for all times.
94 O God of vengeance, Jehovah,O God of vengeance, shine forth! 2 Rise up, O Judge of the earth.Repay to the haughty what they deserve. 3 How long will the wicked, O Jehovah,How long will the wicked continue to exult? 4 They babble and speak arrogantly;All the wrongdoers brag about themselves. 5 They crush your people, O Jehovah,And oppress your inheritance. 6 They kill the widow and the foreign resident,And they murder the fatherless children. 7 They say: “Jah does not see;The God of Jacob does not take notice of it.” 8 Understand this, you who are unreasoning;You foolish ones, when will you ever show insight? 9 The One who made the ear, can he not hear?The One who formed the eye, can he not see?10 The One correcting the nations, can he not reprove?He is the One who imparts knowledge to people!11 Jehovah knows the thoughts of men,That they are but a mere breath.12 Happy is the man whom you correct, O Jah,Whom you teach from your law,13 To give him tranquillity during days of calamity,Until a pit is dug for the wicked.14 For Jehovah will not forsake his people,Nor will he abandon his inheritance.15 For judgment will once again be righteous,And all the upright in heart will follow it.16 Who will rise up for me against the wicked?Who will take a stand for me against the wrongdoers?17 If Jehovah had not been my helper,I would soon have perished.18 When I said: “My foot is slipping,”Your loyal love, O Jehovah, kept supporting me.19 When anxieties overwhelmed me,You comforted and soothed me.20 Can a throne of corruption be allied with youWhile it is framing trouble in the name of the law?21 They make vicious attacks on the righteous oneAnd condemn the innocent one to death.22 But Jehovah will become a secure refuge for me,My God is my rock of refuge.23 He will make their wicked deeds come back upon them.He will do away with them by means of their own evil.Jehovah our God will do away with them.
95 Come, let us shout joyfully to Jehovah!Let us shout in triumph to our Rock of salvation. 2 Let us come into his presence with thanksgiving;Let us sing and shout in triumph to him. 3 For Jehovah is a great God,A great King over all other gods. 4 In his hand are the depths of the earth;The mountain peaks belong to him. 5 The sea, which he made, belongs to him,And his hands formed the dry land. 6 Come, let us worship and bow down;Let us kneel before Jehovah our Maker. 7 For he is our God,And we are the people of his pasture,The sheep in his care.Today if you listen to his voice, 8 Do not harden your heart as at Merʹi·bah,As in the day of Masʹsah in the wilderness, 9 When your forefathers tested me;They challenged me, though they had seen my works.10 For 40 years I felt a loathing toward that generation, and I said:“They are a people who always go astray in their hearts;They have not come to know my ways.”11 So I swore in my anger:“They will not enter into my rest.”
96 Sing to Jehovah a new song.Sing to Jehovah, all the earth! 2 Sing to Jehovah; praise his name.Proclaim the good news of his salvation day after day. 3 Declare his glory among the nations,His wonderful works among all the peoples. 4 Jehovah is great and most worthy of praise.He is more awe-inspiring than all other gods. 5 All the gods of the peoples are worthless gods,But Jehovah is the one who made the heavens. 6 In his presence are majesty and splendor;Strength and beauty are in his sanctuary. 7 Give Jehovah his due, you families of the peoples,Give Jehovah his due for his glory and strength. 8 Give Jehovah the glory due his name;Bring a gift and come into his courtyards. 9 Bow down to Jehovah in holy adornment;Tremble before him, all the earth!10 Declare among the nations: “Jehovah has become King!The earth is firmly established, it cannot be moved.He will judge the peoples fairly.”11 Let the heavens rejoice, and let the earth be joyful;Let the sea thunder and all that fills it;12 Let the fields and everything in them rejoice.At the same time let all the trees of the forest shout joyfully13 Before Jehovah, for he is coming,He is coming to judge the earth.He will judge the inhabited earth with righteousnessAnd the peoples with his faithfulness.
97 Jehovah has become King!Let the earth be joyful.Let the many islands rejoice. 2 Clouds and thick gloom are all around him;Righteousness and justice are the foundation of his throne. 3 Fire goes before himAnd consumes his adversaries on every side. 4 His lightning bolts light up the land;The earth sees it and trembles. 5 The mountains melt like wax before Jehovah,Before the Lord of the whole earth. 6 The heavens proclaim his righteousness,And all the peoples see his glory. 7 Let all those serving any carved image be put to shame,Those who boast about their worthless gods.Bow down to him, all you gods. 8 Zion hears and rejoices;The towns of Judah are joyfulBecause of your judgments, O Jehovah. 9 For you, O Jehovah, are the Most High over all the earth;You are exalted far above all other gods.10 O you who love Jehovah, hate what is bad.He is guarding the lives of his loyal ones;He rescues them from the hand of the wicked.11 Light has flashed up for the righteousAnd rejoicing for those upright in heart.12 Rejoice in Jehovah, you righteous ones,And give thanks to his holy name.
A melody.98 Sing to Jehovah a new song,For he has done wonderful things.His right hand, his holy arm, has brought about salvation. 2 Jehovah has made known his salvation;He has revealed his righteousness before the nations. 3 He has remembered his loyal love and faithfulness to the house of Israel.All the ends of the earth have seen the salvation by our God. 4 Shout in triumph to Jehovah, all the earth.Be cheerful and shout joyfully and sing praises. 5 Sing praises to Jehovah with the harp,With the harp and the melodious song. 6 With the trumpets and the sound of the horn,Shout in triumph before the King, Jehovah. 7 Let the sea thunder and all that fills it,The earth and those dwelling in it. 8 Let the rivers clap their hands;Let the mountains shout joyfully together 9 Before Jehovah, for he is coming to judge the earth.He will judge the inhabited earth with righteousnessAnd the peoples with fairness.
99 Jehovah has become King. Let the peoples tremble.He sits enthroned above the cherubs. Let the earth shake. 2 Jehovah is great in Zion,And he is high over all the peoples. 3 Let them praise your great name,For it is awe-inspiring and holy. 4 He is a mighty king who loves justice.You have firmly established what is upright.You have brought about justice and righteousness in Jacob. 5 Exalt Jehovah our God and bow down at his footstool;He is holy. 6 Moses and Aaron were among his priests,And Samuel was among those calling on his name.They would call to Jehovah,And he would answer them. 7 He would speak to them from the pillar of cloud.They kept his reminders and the decree that he gave to them. 8 O Jehovah our God, you answered them.You were a God who pardoned them,But you punished them for their sinful deeds. 9 Exalt Jehovah our GodAnd bow down before his holy mountain,For Jehovah our God is holy.
BOOK ONE(Psalms 1-41)1 Happy is the man who does not walk according to the advice of the wickedAnd does not stand on the path of sinnersAnd does not sit in the seat of scoffers. 2 But his delight is in the law of Jehovah,And he reads His law in an undertone day and night. 3 He will be like a tree planted by streams of water,A tree that produces fruit in its season,The foliage of which does not wither.And everything he does will succeed. 4 The wicked are not like that;They are like the chaff that the wind blows away. 5 That is why the wicked will not remain standing in the judgment;Nor will sinners remain standing in the assembly of the righteous. 6 For Jehovah is aware of the way of the righteous,But the way of the wicked will perish.
10 Proverbs of Solʹo·mon.A wise son makes his father rejoice,But a foolish son is the grief of his mother. 2 The treasures gained by wickedness will be of no benefit,But righteousness is what rescues from death. 3 Jehovah will not cause the righteous one to go hungry,But he will deny the wicked what they crave. 4 Idle hands will cause poverty,But diligent hands bring riches. 5 The son acting with insight gathers the crop in summer,But the son acting shamefully is fast asleep during the harvest. 6 Blessings are on the head of the righteous one,But the mouth of the wicked conceals violence. 7 The memory of the righteous one is due for a blessing,But the name of the wicked will rot. 8 The wisehearted person will accept instructions,But the one speaking foolishly will be trodden down. 9 The one walking in integrity will walk in security,But the one making his ways crooked will be found out.10 The one who slyly winks his eye causes grief,And the one who speaks foolishly will be trodden down.11 The mouth of the righteous one is a source of life,But the mouth of the wicked conceals violence.12 Hatred is what stirs up contentions,But love covers over all transgressions.13 Wisdom is found on the lips of the discerning person,But the rod is for the back of one lacking good sense.14 Those who are wise treasure up knowledge,But the mouth of the fool invites ruin.15 The wealth of a rich man is his fortified city.The ruin of the poor is their poverty.16 The activity of the righteous one leads to life;But the produce of the wicked one leads to sin.17 The one who heeds discipline is a path to life,But the one who ignores reproof leads others astray.18 The one who conceals his hatred speaks lies,And the one spreading malicious reports is stupid.19 When words are many, transgression cannot be avoided,But whoever controls his lips acts discreetly.20 The tongue of the righteous one is like the finest silver,But the heart of the wicked one is worth little.21 The lips of the righteous one nourish many,But the foolish die for lack of sense.22 It is the blessing of Jehovah that makes one rich,And He adds no pain with it.23 Engaging in shameful conduct is like a game to the stupid one,But wisdom is for the man of discernment.24 What the wicked one fears will come upon him;But the desire of the righteous will be granted.25 When the storm passes by, the wicked one will be no more,But the righteous one is a foundation forever.26 Like vinegar to the teeth and smoke to the eyes,So the lazy person is to the one who sends him.27 The fear of Jehovah prolongs life,But the years of the wicked will be cut short.28 The expectation of the righteous brings joy,But the hope of the wicked will perish.29 The way of Jehovah is a stronghold for the blameless one,But it means ruin for evildoers.30 The righteous one will never be made to fall,But the wicked will no longer inhabit the earth.31 The mouth of the righteous one produces wisdom,But the perverse tongue will be cut off.32 The lips of the righteous one know what is pleasing,But the mouth of the wicked is perverse.
11 Dishonest scales are detestable to Jehovah,But an accurate weight brings pleasure to him. 2 When presumptuousness comes, dishonor will follow,But wisdom is with the modest ones. 3 The integrity of the upright is what guides them,But the deviousness of the treacherous will destroy them. 4 Wealth will be of no benefit on the day of fury,But righteousness is what will rescue from death. 5 The righteousness of the blameless one makes his path straight,But the wicked one will fall because of his own wickedness. 6 The righteousness of the upright will rescue them,But the treacherous will be caught by their own desires. 7 When a wicked man dies, his hope perishes;And expectations based on his power also perish. 8 The righteous one is rescued from distress,And the wicked one takes his place. 9 By his mouth the apostate brings his neighbor to ruin,But by knowledge the righteous are rescued.10 The goodness of the righteous makes a city rejoice,And when the wicked perish, there is a joyful cry.11 Because of the blessing of the upright a city is exalted,But the mouth of the wicked tears it down.12 Whoever is lacking good sense shows contempt for his neighbor,But the man of true discernment remains silent.13 A slanderer goes about revealing confidential talk,But the trustworthy person keeps a confidence.14 When there is no skillful direction, the people fall,But there is success through many advisers.15 Whoever guarantees a loan for a stranger is sure to fare badly,But whoever avoids shaking hands in a pledge will be secure.16 A gracious woman acquires glory,But ruthless men seize riches.17 A kind man benefits himself,But the cruel person brings trouble on himself.18 The wicked one earns deceptive wages,But the one who sows righteousness receives a true reward.19 The one standing firmly for righteousness is in line for life,But the one chasing after evil is in line for death.20 Those crooked at heart are detestable to Jehovah,But those whose way is blameless bring pleasure to him.21 Be assured of this: An evil person will not go unpunished,But the children of the righteous will escape.22 Like a gold ring in the snout of a pigIs a beautiful woman who rejects good sense.23 The desire of the righteous leads to good,But what the wicked hope for leads to fury.24 One gives generously and ends up with more;Another withholds what should be given, but he comes to poverty.25 The generous person will prosper,And whoever refreshes others will himself be refreshed.26 The people will curse the one who withholds grain,But they will bless the one who sells it.27 The one who diligently seeks to do good seeks favor,But the one searching for bad—that is what will surely come upon him.28 The one trusting in his riches will fall,But the righteous will flourish like the foliage.29 Anyone who brings trouble on his household will inherit the wind,And the fool will be a servant to the wisehearted one.30 The fruitage of the righteous one is a tree of life,And the one who wins souls is wise.31 If, indeed, the righteous one on earth is rewarded,How much more the wicked one and the sinner!
12 The one who loves discipline loves knowledge,But the one who hates reproof is unreasoning. 2 The good person obtains Jehovah’s approval,But He condemns the man of wicked schemes. 3 No man is made secure by wickedness,But the righteous will never be uprooted. 4 A capable wife is a crown to her husband,But the wife who acts shamefully is like rottenness in his bones. 5 The thoughts of the righteous are just,But the guidance of the wicked is deceptive. 6 The words of the wicked are a deadly ambush,But the mouth of the upright saves them. 7 When the wicked are overthrown, they are no more,But the house of the righteous will keep standing. 8 A man is praised for the discretion of his mouth,But one with a twisted heart will be treated with contempt. 9 Better to be lightly esteemed and have a servantThan to glorify oneself and have no food.10 The righteous one takes care of his domestic animals,But even the mercy of the wicked is cruel.11 The one who cultivates his land will be satisfied with food,But the one pursuing worthless things is lacking good sense.12 The wicked man envies what other evil men have caught,But the root of the righteous bears fruit.13 The evil man is ensnared by his own sinful speech,But the righteous one escapes from distress.14 From the fruitage of his speech a man is satisfied with good,And the work of his hands will reward him.15 The way of the fool is right in his own eyes,But the wise one accepts advice.16 A fool immediately shows his annoyance,But the shrewd man overlooks an insult.17 The one who testifies faithfully will tell the truth,But a false witness speaks deceit.18 Thoughtless speech is like the stabs of a sword,But the tongue of the wise is a healing.19 Truthful lips will endure forever,But a lying tongue will last for only a moment.20 Deceit is in the heart of those who plot mischief,But those who promote peace have joy.21 No harm will befall the righteous one,But the wicked will have their fill of calamity.22 Lying lips are detestable to Jehovah,But those acting faithfully bring pleasure to him.23 A shrewd man conceals what he knows,But the heart of the fool blurts out his foolishness.24 The hand of the diligent ones will rule,But idle hands will be put to forced labor.25 Anxiety in a man’s heart weighs it down,But a good word cheers it up.26 The righteous one searches out his pastures,But the course of the wicked leads them astray.27 The lazy do not chase after the prey,But diligence is a man’s precious treasure.28 The path of righteousness leads to life;Along its pathway there is no death.
13 A wise son accepts his father’s discipline,But the scoffer does not listen to a rebuke. 2 From the fruitage of his speech a man will eat what is good,But the very desire of the treacherous is for violence. 3 The one guarding his mouth protects his life,But the one opening his lips wide will come to ruin. 4 The lazy person has his cravings, yet he has nothing,But the diligent one will be fully satisfied. 5 The righteous one hates lies,But the actions of the wicked bring shame and disgrace. 6 Righteousness protects the one whose way is innocent,But wickedness brings down the sinner. 7 There is one who pretends to be rich, yet has nothing;There is another who pretends to be poor, yet has great wealth. 8 Riches are the ransom for a man’s life,But the poor are not even threatened. 9 The light of the righteous shines brightly,But the lamp of the wicked will be extinguished.10 Presumptuousness leads only to strife,But wisdom belongs to those who seek advice.11 Wealth quickly gained will dwindle,But the wealth of the one who gathers it little by little will increase.12 Expectation postponed makes the heart sick,But a desire realized is a tree of life.13 Whoever despises instruction will pay the penalty,But the one who respects the commandment will be rewarded.14 The teaching of the wise one is a source of lifeTo turn one away from the snares of death.15 Keen insight wins favor,But the way of the treacherous is harsh.16 The shrewd person acts with knowledge,But the fool exposes his own foolishness.17 A wicked messenger falls into trouble,But a faithful envoy brings healing.18 Whoever neglects discipline comes to poverty and disgrace,But the one accepting correction will be glorified.19 Desire when realized is sweet to a person,But the stupid hate to turn away from bad.20 The one walking with the wise will become wise,But the one who has dealings with the stupid will fare badly.21 Calamity pursues sinners,But prosperity rewards the righteous.22 The good person leaves an inheritance to his grandchildren,But the sinner’s wealth will be stored up for the righteous one.23 The plowed field of the poor yields much food,But it may be swept away by injustice.24 Whoever holds back his rod hates his son,But the one who loves him disciplines him diligently.25 The righteous one eats and satisfies his appetite,But the stomach of the wicked is empty.
14 The truly wise woman builds up her house,But the foolish one tears it down with her own hands. 2 The one walking in his uprightness fears Jehovah,But the one whose ways are devious despises Him. 3 The rod of haughtiness is in the mouth of the fool,But the lips of the wise will protect them. 4 Where there are no cattle the manger is clean,But the power of a bull yields an abundant harvest. 5 A faithful witness will not lie,But a false witness lies with every breath. 6 The scoffer seeks wisdom and finds none,But knowledge comes easily to the person with understanding. 7 Stay away from the foolish man,For you will not find knowledge on his lips. 8 By wisdom the shrewd man understands the way he is going,But the stupid are deceived by their foolishness. 9 Fools make fun of guilt,But among the upright, there is a willingness to reconcile.10 The heart knows its own bitterness,And no outsider can share in its joy.11 The house of the wicked will be destroyed,But the tent of the upright will flourish.12 There is a way that seems right to a man,But in the end it leads to death.13 Even in laughter the heart may feel pain,And rejoicing may end in grief.14 The one wayward at heart will reap the results of his ways,But the good man reaps the reward of his dealings.15 The naive person believes every word,But the shrewd one ponders each step.16 The wise one is cautious and turns away from evil,But the stupid one is reckless and overconfident.17 The one who is quick to anger acts foolishly,But the man who thinks things out is hated.18 The naive will inherit foolishness,But the shrewd are crowned with knowledge.19 Bad people will have to bow down before the good,And the wicked will bow at the gates of the righteous.20 The poor man is hated even by his neighbors,But many are the friends of the rich person.21 The one who despises his neighbor sins,But whoever shows compassion to the lowly is happy.22 Will not those who plot mischief go astray?But those intent on doing good will receive loyal love and faithfulness.23 There is benefit in every kind of hard work,But mere talk leads to want.24 The crown of the wise is their wealth;But the foolishness of the stupid is only foolishness.25 A true witness saves lives,But a deceitful one lies with every breath.26 There is strong confidence in the fear of Jehovah,And it will be a refuge for his children.27 The fear of Jehovah is a fountain of life,To turn one away from the snares of death.28 A multitude of people are a king’s majesty,But a ruler without subjects is ruined.29 The one who is slow to anger has great discernment,But the impatient one displays his foolishness.30 A calm heart gives life to the body,But jealousy is rottenness to the bones.31 The one who defrauds the lowly one insults his Maker,But whoever shows compassion to the poor glorifies Him.32 The wicked one will be brought down by his own evil,But the righteous one will find refuge in his integrity.33 Wisdom rests quietly in the heart of an understanding person,But among the stupid it must make itself known.34 Righteousness exalts a nation,But sin is disgraceful to a people.35 The king finds pleasure in a servant who acts with insight,But his fury is against the one who acts shamefully.
15 A mild answer turns away rage,But a harsh word stirs up anger. 2 The tongue of the wise makes good use of knowledge,But the mouth of the stupid blurts out foolishness. 3 The eyes of Jehovah are everywhere,Watching both the bad and the good. 4 A calm tongue is a tree of life,But twisted speech causes despair. 5 A fool disrespects his father’s discipline,But a shrewd person accepts correction. 6 In the house of the righteous one there is abundant treasure,But the produce of the wicked one brings him trouble. 7 The lips of the wise spread knowledge,But not so the heart of the stupid one. 8 The sacrifice of the wicked is detestable to Jehovah,But the prayer of the upright is a pleasure to Him. 9 Jehovah detests the way of the wicked one,But he loves the one who pursues righteousness.10 Discipline seems bad to one forsaking the way,But whoever hates reproof will die.11 The Grave and the place of destruction are in full view of Jehovah.How much more so the hearts of men!12 The scoffer does not love the one correcting him.He will not consult the wise.13 A joyful heart makes for a cheerful countenance,But heartache crushes the spirit.14 The understanding heart seeks knowledge,But the mouth of the stupid feeds on foolishness.15 All the days of the afflicted one are bad,But the one with a cheerful heart has a continual feast.16 Better is a little in the fear of JehovahThan great wealth along with anxiety.17 Better is a dish of vegetables where there is loveThan a fattened bull where there is hatred.18 A hot-tempered man stirs up strife,But one who is slow to anger calms a quarrel.19 The way of the lazy one is like a hedge of thorns,But the path of the upright is like a level highway.20 A wise son makes his father rejoice,But a stupid man despises his mother.21 Foolishness is a joy to one lacking good sense,But the man of discernment walks straight ahead.22 Plans fail when there is no consultation,But there is accomplishment through many advisers.23 A man rejoices in giving the right answer,And a word spoken at the right time—how good it is!24 The path of life leads upward to one with insight,To turn him away from the Grave below.25 Jehovah will tear down the house of the haughty,But he will preserve the boundary of the widow.26 Jehovah detests the schemes of the wicked one,But pleasant sayings are pure to Him.27 The one making dishonest profit brings trouble on his own household,But the one hating bribes will keep living.28 The heart of the righteous one meditates before answering,But the mouth of the wicked blurts out bad things.29 Jehovah is far away from the wicked,But he hears the prayer of the righteous.30 Bright eyes make the heart rejoice;A good report invigorates the bones.31 The one who listens to life-giving reproofIs at home among the wise.32 Anyone refusing discipline despises his life,But whoever listens to reproof acquires understanding.33 The fear of Jehovah is a training in wisdom,And before glory there is humility.
16 A man prepares the thoughts of his heart,But the answer he gives is from Jehovah. 2 All of a man’s ways seem right to him,But Jehovah examines the motives. 3 Commit to Jehovah whatever you do,And your plans will succeed. 4 Jehovah has made everything work for his purpose,Even the wicked for the day of disaster. 5 Everyone proud in heart is detestable to Jehovah.Be assured that he will not go unpunished. 6 By loyal love and faithfulness, error is atoned for,And by fearing Jehovah one turns away from bad. 7 When Jehovah is pleased with a man’s ways,He causes even his enemies to be at peace with him. 8 Better is a little with righteousnessThan a large income without justice. 9 A man may plot out his course in his heart,But it is Jehovah who directs his steps.10 Inspired decision should be on the lips of a king;He must never betray justice.11 Honest balances and scales are from Jehovah;All the weights in the bag are his doing.12 Wicked practices are detestable to kings,For the throne is firmly established by righteousness.13 Righteous speech is a pleasure to kings.They love someone who speaks honestly.14 The king’s rage is like a messenger of death,But the wise man appeases it.15 In the light of the king’s face there is life;His favor is like a cloud of rain in spring.16 How much better to acquire wisdom than gold!To gain understanding is to be chosen over silver.17 The highway of the upright avoids what is bad.Whoever safeguards his way preserves his life.18 Pride is before a crash,And a haughty spirit before stumbling.19 Better to be humble among the meekThan to share the spoil of the haughty.20 The one who shows insight in a matter will find success,And happy is the one trusting in Jehovah.21 The wise in heart will be called understanding,And the one kind in speech adds persuasiveness.22 Insight is a fountain of life to those possessing it,But fools are disciplined by their own foolishness.23 The heart of the wise one gives his mouth insightAnd adds persuasiveness to his speech.24 Pleasant sayings are a honeycomb,Sweet to the soul and a healing to the bones.25 There is a way that seems right to a man,But in the end it leads to death.26 The appetite of a laborer makes him work hardFor his hunger urges him on.27 A worthless man digs up what is bad;His speech is like a scorching fire.28 A troublemaker causes dissension,And a slanderer separates close friends.29 A violent man entices his neighborAnd leads him in the wrong way.30 He winks his eye as he schemes harm.He pinches his lips together as he carries out mischief.31 Gray hair is a crown of beautyWhen it is found in the way of righteousness.32 The one slow to anger is better than a mighty man,And the one controlling his temper than one conquering a city.33 The lot is cast into the lap,But every decision by it is from Jehovah.
17 Better is a piece of dry bread where there is peaceThan a house full of feasting along with quarreling. 2 A servant with insight will rule over a son who acts shamefully;He will share in the inheritance as one of the brothers. 3 The refining pot is for silver and the furnace for gold,But Jehovah is the examiner of hearts. 4 A wicked man pays attention to hurtful speech,And a deceptive man listens to a malicious tongue. 5 Whoever mocks the poor insults his Maker,And whoever rejoices over another’s disaster will not go unpunished. 6 Grandsons are a crown to the aged,And fathers are the glory of their sons. 7 Upright speech does not befit a fool.How much less does false speech befit a ruler! 8 A gift is like a precious stone to its owner;Everywhere he turns, it brings him success. 9 Whoever forgives a transgression seeks love,But the one who keeps harping on a matter separates close friends.10 A rebuke makes a deeper impression on one having understandingThan striking a stupid person a hundred times.11 A bad man seeks only rebellion,But a cruel messenger will be sent to punish him.12 Better to meet a bear bereaved of her cubsThan to encounter someone stupid in his foolishness.13 If anyone repays bad for good,Bad will not depart from his house.14 Beginning a fight is like opening a floodgate;Before the quarrel breaks out, take your leave.15 Anyone who acquits the wicked one and anyone who condemns the righteous one—Both of them are detestable to Jehovah.16 What good is it that the stupid one has the means to acquire wisdomWhen he has no heart for acquiring it?17 A true friend shows love at all timesAnd is a brother who is born for times of distress.18 A man lacking good sense shakes hands and agreesTo put up security in the presence of his neighbor.19 The one who loves conflict loves transgression.Anyone who makes his entryway high invites a crash.20 The one who is crooked at heart will not find success,And the one who speaks deceitfully will fall into ruin.21 The one who fathers a stupid child will experience grief;And the father of a senseless child has no joy.22 A joyful heart is good medicine,But a crushed spirit saps one’s strength.23 A wicked man will take a bribe in secretTo pervert the course of justice.24 Wisdom is directly in front of the discerning person,But the eyes of the stupid wander to the ends of the earth.25 A stupid son brings grief to his fatherAnd heartache to the one who gave birth to him.26 To punish the righteous one is not good,And to flog honorable people goes against what is right.27 A man of knowledge restrains his words,And a discerning man will remain calm.28 Even a fool who keeps silent will be considered wise,And the one who seals his lips, discerning.
18 Whoever isolates himself pursues his own selfish desires;He rejects all practical wisdom. 2 A stupid person takes no pleasure in understanding;He would rather disclose what is in his heart. 3 When a wicked person comes, contempt also comes,And along with dishonor there is disgrace. 4 The words of a man’s mouth are deep waters.The fountain of wisdom is a bubbling brook. 5 It is not good to show partiality to the wicked oneOr to deprive the righteous one of justice. 6 The speech of the stupid one leads to quarrels,And his mouth invites a beating. 7 The mouth of the stupid is his ruin,And his lips are a snare for his life. 8 The words of a slanderer are like tasty morsels;They are gulped right down into the stomach. 9 Whoever is lazy in his workIs a brother to the one who causes ruin.10 The name of Jehovah is a strong tower.Into it the righteous one runs and receives protection.11 The wealth of the rich is his fortified city;It is like a protective wall in his imagination.12 Before a crash a man’s heart is lofty,And before glory there is humility.13 When anyone replies to a matter before he hears the facts,It is foolish and humiliating.14 A person’s spirit can sustain him through illness,But who can bear a crushed spirit?15 The heart of the understanding one acquires knowledge,And the ear of the wise seeks to find knowledge.16 A man’s gift opens the way for him;It gives him access to great people.17 The first to state his case seems right,Until the other party comes and cross-examines him.18 Casting lots puts an end to disputesAnd decides between strong opponents.19 A brother offended is more unyielding than a fortified city,And there are disputes like the bars of a fortress.20 From the fruitage of a man’s speech his stomach will be filled;He will be satisfied with what his lips produce.21 Death and life are in the power of the tongue;Those who love to use it will eat its fruitage.22 The one who finds a good wife has found something good,And he receives Jehovah’s favor.23 The poor man implores when speaking,But the rich man answers harshly.24 There are companions ready to crush one another,But there is a friend who sticks closer than a brother.
19 It is better to be poor and walk in integrityThan to be stupid and speak lies. 2 A person without knowledge is not good,And the one who acts rashly is sinning. 3 It is a man’s own foolishness that distorts his way,And his heart becomes enraged against Jehovah. 4 Wealth attracts many friends,But the poor man will be deserted even by his friend. 5 A false witness will not go unpunished,And the one who lies with every breath will not escape. 6 Many seek the favor of a noble,And everyone is a friend to the man who gives gifts. 7 All the brothers of a poor man hate him;How much more he is shunned by his friends!He pursues them with requests, but no one responds. 8 Whoever acquires good sense loves himself.Whoever treasures discernment will find success. 9 A false witness will not go unpunished,And the one who lies with every breath will perish.10 It is not fitting for a fool to live in luxury;How much less for a servant to rule over princes!11 The insight of a man certainly slows down his anger,And it is beauty on his part to overlook an offense.12 The king’s rage is like the growling of a lion,But his favor is like dew on the vegetation.13 A stupid son brings adversity on his father,And a quarrelsome wife is like a roof that never stops leaking.14 A house and wealth are inherited from fathers,But a discreet wife is from Jehovah.15 Laziness brings on a deep sleep,And a sluggish person will go hungry.16 The one who keeps the commandment keeps his life;The one who is reckless about his ways will die.17 The one showing favor to the lowly is lending to Jehovah,And He will repay him for what he does.18 Discipline your son while there is hope,And do not become responsible for his death.19 The hot-tempered man will pay the penalty;If you try to spare him, you will have to do it again and again.20 Listen to counsel and accept discipline,In order to become wise in your future.21 Many are the plans in a man’s heart,But the counsel of Jehovah is what will prevail.22 The desirable thing in a man is his loyal love;And it is better to be poor than to be a liar.23 The fear of Jehovah leads to life;The one who has it will have a pleasant rest, free from harm.24 The lazy one buries his hand in the banquet bowl,But he does not even bother to bring it back to his mouth.25 Strike the ridiculer, so that the inexperienced one may become shrewd,And reprove the understanding one, so that he will increase in knowledge.26 The one who mistreats his father and drives away his motherIs a son causing shame and disgrace.27 My son, if you stop listening to discipline,You will stray from the sayings of knowledge.28 A worthless witness mocks justice,And the mouth of the wicked gulps down evil.29 Judgment is in store for ridiculers,And beatings for the back of the stupid ones.
2 My son, if you accept my sayingsAnd treasure up my commandments, 2 By making your ear attentive to wisdomAnd inclining your heart to discernment; 3 Moreover, if you call out for understandingAnd raise your voice for discernment; 4 If you keep seeking for it as for silver,And you keep searching for it as for hidden treasures; 5 Then you will understand the fear of Jehovah,And you will find the knowledge of God. 6 For Jehovah himself gives wisdom;From his mouth come knowledge and discernment. 7 He treasures up practical wisdom for the upright;He is a shield for those walking in integrity. 8 He watches over the paths of justice,And he will guard the way of his loyal ones. 9 Then you will understand what is righteous and just and fair,The entire course of what is good.10 When wisdom enters your heartAnd knowledge becomes pleasant to your soul,11 Thinking ability will keep watch over you,And discernment will safeguard you,12 To save you from the bad course,From the man speaking perverse things,13 From those leaving the upright pathsTo walk in the ways of darkness,14 From those who rejoice in wrongdoing,Who find joy in the perverseness of evil,15 Those whose paths are crookedAnd whose entire course is devious.16 It will save you from the wayward woman,From the smooth words of the immoral woman,17 Who abandons the close companion of her youthAnd forgets the covenant of her God;18 For her house sinks down into death,And her paths lead to those powerless in death.19 None of those having relations with her will return,Nor will they regain the pathways of life.20 So follow the way of good peopleAnd stay on the paths of the righteous,21 For only the upright will reside in the earth,And the blameless will remain in it.22 As for the wicked, they will be cut off from the earth,And the treacherous will be torn away from it.
20 Wine is a ridiculer, alcohol is unruly;Whoever goes astray by them is not wise. 2 The terror of a king is like the growling of a lion;Whoever provokes his anger risks his own life. 3 It is honorable for a man to refrain from a dispute,But every fool will become embroiled in it. 4 The lazy one does not plow in winter,So he will be begging during the harvest when he has nothing. 5 The thoughts of a man’s heart are like deep waters,But the discerning man draws them out. 6 Many men proclaim their loyal love,But who can find a faithful man? 7 The righteous one is walking in his integrity.Happy are his children who come after him. 8 When the king sits on the throne to judge,He sifts out all evil with his eyes. 9 Who can say: “I have cleansed my heart;I am pure from my sin”?10 Dishonest weights and false measures—Both are detestable to Jehovah.11 Even a child is known by his actions,Whether his behavior is pure and right.12 The hearing ear and the seeing eye—Jehovah has made both of them.13 Do not love sleep, or you will come to poverty.Open your eyes, and you will be satisfied with bread.14 “It is no good, it is no good!” says the buyer;Then he goes away and boasts about himself.15 There is gold, also much coral,But the lips of knowledge are something precious.16 Take a man’s garment if he has given security for a stranger;Seize the pledge from him if he did so for a foreign woman.17 Bread gained by deceit tastes good to a man,But afterward his mouth will be full of gravel.18 By consultation, plans will succeed,And by skillful direction wage your war.19 A slanderer goes about revealing confidential talk;Do not associate with one who loves to gossip.20 Whoever curses his father and his mother,His lamp will be extinguished when darkness comes.21 An inheritance obtained first by greedWill not be a blessing in the end.22 Do not say: “I will pay back evil!”Hope in Jehovah, and he will save you.23 Dishonest weights are detestable to Jehovah,And deceptive scales are not good.24 A man’s footsteps are directed by Jehovah;How can a man understand his own way?25 It is a snare for a man to cry out rashly, “Holy!”And only later to give consideration to what he vowed.26 A wise king sifts out the wickedAnd drives the threshing wheel over them.27 The breath of a man is the lamp of Jehovah,Searching through his innermost being.28 Loyal love and faithfulness safeguard the king;By loyal love he sustains his throne.29 The glory of young men is their strength,And the splendor of old men is their gray hair.30 Bruises and wounds purge away evil,And beatings cleanse one’s innermost being.
21 A king’s heart is like streams of water in Jehovah’s hand.He directs it wherever He pleases. 2 All of a man’s ways seem right to him,But Jehovah examines the hearts. 3 To do what is right and justIs more pleasing to Jehovah than a sacrifice. 4 Haughty eyes and an arrogant heart—The lamp that guides the wicked is sin. 5 The plans of the diligent surely lead to success,But all who are hasty surely head for poverty. 6 Gaining treasures by a lying tongueIs like a vanishing mist, a deadly snare. 7 The violence of the wicked will sweep them away,For they refuse to act with justice. 8 The way of a guilty man is crooked,But the activity of the pure man is upright. 9 Better to dwell on a corner of the roofThan in the same house with a quarrelsome wife.10 The wicked man craves what is bad;He shows no favor toward his neighbor.11 When a ridiculer is punished, the inexperienced become wiser,And when a wise person receives insight, he gains knowledge.12 The Righteous One observes the house of the wicked one;He overthrows the wicked to their ruin.13 Whoever stops up his ear to the cry of the lowly oneWill himself call and not be answered.14 A secret gift subdues anger,And a hidden bribe, fierce rage.15 It is a joy for the righteous one to act with justice,But it is something terrible to those who practice evil.16 The man who strays from the way of insightWill rest in the company of those powerless in death.17 The one who loves having a good time will come to poverty;The one who loves wine and oil will not grow rich.18 The wicked one is a ransom for the righteous one,And the treacherous one will be taken in place of the upright.19 Better to dwell in the wildernessThan with a quarrelsome and irritable wife.20 Precious treasure and oil are found in the house of the wise,But the stupid man will squander what he has.21 Whoever pursues righteousness and loyal loveWill find life, righteousness, and glory.22 A wise man can scale the city of the mightyAnd undermine the strength in which they trust.23 The one guarding his mouth and his tongueKeeps himself out of trouble.24 A presumptuous, arrogant braggart is what you callThe man who acts with reckless presumptuousness.25 What the lazy man craves will put him to death,For his hands refuse to work.26 All day long he greedily craves,But the righteous one gives, holding nothing back.27 The sacrifice of the wicked is detestable.How much more when he offers it with evil intent!28 A lying witness will perish,But the man who listens will testify with success.29 The wicked man puts on a bold face,But it is the upright one whose course is sure.30 There is no wisdom, nor discernment, nor counsel in opposition to Jehovah.31 The horse is prepared for the day of battle,But salvation belongs to Jehovah.
22 A good name is to be chosen rather than great wealth;To be respected is better than silver and gold. 2 The rich and the poor have this in common:Jehovah made them both. 3 The shrewd one sees the danger and conceals himself,But the inexperienced keep right on going and suffer the consequences. 4 The result of humility and the fear of JehovahIs riches and glory and life. 5 Thorns and traps are in the crooked man’s path,But whoever values his life keeps far away from them. 6 Train a boy in the way he should go;Even when he grows old he will not depart from it. 7 The rich one rules the poor,And the borrower is a slave to the lender. 8 Whoever sows unrighteousness will reap disaster,And the rod of his fury will come to its end. 9 The generous person will be blessed,For he shares his food with the poor.10 Drive away the scornful man,And contention will disappear;Disputes and insults will cease.11 The one who loves a pure heart and whose speech is graciousWill have the king as his friend.12 The eyes of Jehovah safeguard knowledge,But He overturns the words of the treacherous.13 The lazy one says: “There is a lion outside!I will be killed in the middle of the public square!”14 The mouth of wayward women is a deep pit.The one condemned by Jehovah will fall into it.15 Foolishness is bound up in the heart of a boy,But the rod of discipline will remove it far from him.16 The one defrauding the poor to increase his wealthAnd the one giving gifts to the richWill end up in poverty.17 Incline your ear and listen to the words of the wise,In order to apply your heart to my knowledge,18 For it is pleasant to keep them deep within you,So that all of them may constantly be on your lips.19 For your confidence to be in Jehovah,I am giving you knowledge today.20 Have I not already written you,Imparting advice and knowledge,21 To teach you true and reliable words,So that you can return with an accurate report to the one who sent you?22 Do not rob the poor man because he is poor,And do not crush the lowly man in the city gate,23 For Jehovah himself will plead their causeAnd he will take the life of those who defraud them.24 Do not keep company with a hot-tempered manOr get involved with one disposed to rage,25 So that you never learn his waysAnd ensnare yourself.26 Do not be among those who shake hands in a pledge,Who put up security for loans.27 If you have nothing to pay,Your bed will be taken right out from under you!28 Do not move an ancient boundary markerThat your forefathers put in place.29 Have you seen a man skillful at his work?He will stand before kings;He will not stand before common men.
23 When you sit down to eat with a king,Carefully consider what is before you; 2 Put a knife to your throatIf you have a large appetite. 3 Do not crave his delicacies,For it is deceptive food. 4 Do not wear yourself out to gain wealth.Stop and show understanding. 5 When you cast your eyes on it, it is not there,For it will surely sprout wings like an eagle and fly off into the sky. 6 Do not eat the food of a stingy person;Do not crave his delicacies, 7 For he is like one keeping accounts.“Eat and drink,” he says to you, but he does not mean it. 8 You will vomit up the morsels you have eatenAnd will have wasted your compliments. 9 Do not speak in the ears of the stupid one,For he will despise the wisdom of your words.10 Do not move an ancient boundary markerOr encroach on the field of the fatherless.11 For their Defender is strong;He will take up their cause against you.12 Apply your heart to disciplineAnd your ear to the sayings of knowledge.13 Do not hold back discipline from a boy.If you strike him with the rod, he will not die.14 With the rod you should strike him,In order to save him from the Grave.15 My son, if your heart becomes wise,Then my own heart will rejoice.16 My innermost being will find joyWhen your lips speak what is right.17 Let your heart not envy sinners,But be in the fear of Jehovah all day long,18 For then you will have a futureAnd your hope will not be cut off.19 Listen, my son, and become wise,And direct your heart in the right way.20 Do not be among those who drink too much wine,Among those who gorge themselves on meat,21 For a drunkard and a glutton will come to poverty,And drowsiness will clothe one with rags.22 Listen to your father who caused your birth,And do not despise your mother just because she has grown old.23 Buy truth and never sell it,Also wisdom and discipline and understanding.24 The father of a righteous one will surely be joyful;Whoever fathers a wise son will rejoice in him.25 Your father and your mother will rejoice,And she who gave birth to you will be joyful.26 My son, do give your heart to me,And may your eyes take pleasure in my ways.27 For a prostitute is a deep pit,And an immoral woman is a narrow well.28 She lies in wait like a robber;She increases the number of unfaithful men.29 Who has woe? Who has uneasiness?Who has quarrels? Who has complaints?Who has wounds for no reason? Who has bleary eyes?30 Those lingering long over wine;Those searching out mixed wine.31 Do not look at the wine’s red colorAs it sparkles in the cup and goes down smoothly,32 For in the end it bites like a serpent,And it secretes poison like a viper.33 Your eyes will see strange things,And your heart will speak perverse things.34 And you will be like one lying down in the middle of the sea,Like one lying at the top of a ship’s mast.35 You will say: “They have struck me, but I did not feel it.They beat me, but I did not know it.When will I wake up?I need another drink.”
24 Do not envy evil men,And do not crave their company, 2 For their heart meditates on violence,And their lips speak of trouble. 3 By wisdom a house is built up,And by discernment it is made secure. 4 By knowledge its rooms are filledWith all sorts of precious and pleasant treasures. 5 A wise man is powerful,And with knowledge a man increases his power. 6 By skillful direction you will wage your war,And through many advisers there is victory. 7 True wisdom is unattainable for a fool;He has nothing to say in the city gate. 8 Anyone who plots evilWill be called a master schemer. 9 Foolish schemes are sinful,And people detest a ridiculer.10 If you become discouraged in the day of distress,Your strength will be meager.11 Rescue those who are being taken away to death,And hold back those staggering to the slaughter.12 If you say, “But we did not know about this,”Does not the One who examines hearts discern it?Yes, the One who watches you will knowAnd will repay each man according to his activity.13 My son, eat honey, because it is good;Honey from the comb is sweet to the taste.14 Likewise, know that wisdom is good for you.If you find it, you will have a futureAnd your hope will not be cut off.15 Do not wickedly lie in ambush near the home of the righteous one;Do not destroy his place of rest.16 For the righteous one may fall seven times, and he will get up again,But the wicked will be made to stumble by calamity.17 When your enemy falls, do not rejoice,And when he stumbles, do not let your heart be joyful;18 Otherwise, Jehovah will see and be displeased,And He will turn away his anger from him.19 Do not be upset because of evil men;Do not envy wicked people,20 For there is no future for anyone evil;The lamp of the wicked will be extinguished.21 My son, fear Jehovah and the king.And do not associate with dissenters,22 For their disaster will arise suddenly.Who knows what ruin both will bring upon them?23 These sayings also belong to the wise:Partiality in judgment is not good.24 Whoever says to the wicked one, “You are righteous,”Will be cursed by the peoples and denounced by the nations.25 But it will go well for those reproving him;Blessings of good things will come upon them.26 People will kiss the lips of the one replying honestly.27 Prepare your outside work, and get everything ready in the field;Then build your house.28 Do not testify against your neighbor without grounds.Do not use your lips to deceive others.29 Do not say: “I will do to him just as he has done to me;I will repay him for what he did.”30 I passed by the field of the lazy one,By the vineyard of the man lacking good sense.31 I saw that it was overgrown with weeds;The ground was covered with nettles,And its stone wall was broken down.32 I observed this and took it to heart;I saw it and learned this lesson:33 A little sleep, a little slumbering,A little folding of the hands to rest,34 And your poverty will come like a bandit,And your want like an armed man.
25 These also are the proverbs of Solʹo·mon, which the men of Hez·e·kiʹah the king of Judah transcribed: 2 It is the glory of God to keep a matter secret,And the glory of kings is to search through a matter. 3 As the heavens are high and the earth is deep,So the heart of kings is unsearchable. 4 Remove the dross from the silver,And it will emerge completely refined. 5 Remove the wicked one from the king’s presence,And his throne will be firmly established in righteousness. 6 Do not honor yourself before the king,And do not take a place among the prominent, 7 For it is better for him to say to you, “Come up here,”Than to humiliate you in the presence of a noble. 8 Do not rush into a legal dispute,For what will you do later if your neighbor humiliates you? 9 Plead your case with your neighbor,But do not reveal what you were told confidentially,10 So that the one listening will not put you to shameAnd you spread a bad report that cannot be recalled.11 Like apples of gold in silver carvingsIs a word spoken at the right time.12 Like an earring of gold and an ornament of fine goldIs a wise reprover to the receptive ear.13 Just like the coldness of snow on the day of harvestIs a faithful messenger to those who sent him,For he refreshes his master.14 Like clouds and wind that bring no rainIs a man who boasts about a gift never given.15 By patience a commander is won over,And a gentle tongue can break a bone.16 If you find honey, eat only what you need,For if you take too much, you may vomit it up.17 Rarely set foot in your neighbor’s house,So that he does not get tired of you and hate you.18 Like a war club and a sword and a sharp arrowIs a man bearing false witness against his neighbor.19 Like a broken tooth or an unsteady footIs confidence in an unreliable person in times of trouble.20 Like one who removes a garment on a cold dayAnd like vinegar poured on sodaIs the one who sings songs to a gloomy heart.21 If your enemy is hungry, give him bread to eat;If he is thirsty, give him water to drink,22 For you will be heaping burning coals on his head,And Jehovah will reward you.23 The north wind brings a downpour,And a gossiping tongue brings an angry face.24 Better to dwell on a corner of the roofThan in the same house with a quarrelsome wife.25 Like cold water on a tired soulIs a good report from a distant land.26 Like a muddied spring and a ruined wellIs a righteous person who gives in to a wicked one.27 It is not good to eat too much honey,Nor is it glorious to seek one’s own glory.28 As a city broken through, without a wall,Is the man who cannot control his temper.
26 Like snow in summer and rain at harvesttime,Honor is not fitting for someone stupid. 2 Just as a bird has reason to flee and a swallow to fly,So a curse does not come without a real reason. 3 A whip is for the horse, a bridle is for the donkey,And the rod is for the back of stupid people. 4 Do not answer the stupid one according to his foolishness,So that you do not put yourself on his level. 5 Answer the stupid one according to his foolishness,So that he does not think he is wise. 6 Like someone who cripples his own feet and harms himselfIs the one who entrusts matters to someone stupid. 7 Like the limp legs of the lame,So is a proverb in the mouth of stupid people. 8 Like tying a stone to a sling,So is giving glory to someone stupid. 9 Like a thorn plant that comes into the hand of a drunkard,So is a proverb in the mouth of stupid people.10 Like an archer who wounds at random,So is the one who hires the stupid one or those passing by.11 Like a dog that returns to its vomit,The stupid one repeats his foolishness.12 Have you seen a man who thinks he is wise?There is more hope for someone stupid than for him.13 The lazy one says: “There is a young lion in the road,A lion in the public square!”14 A door keeps turning on its hinges,And the lazy one on his bed.15 The lazy one buries his hand in the banquet bowl,But he is too tired to bring it back to his mouth.16 The lazy one thinks he is wiserThan seven people who give a sensible reply.17 Like someone grabbing hold of a dog’s earsIs the one passing by who becomes furious about a quarrel that is not his.18 Like a madman who shoots fiery missiles, arrows, and death19 Is the man who plays a trick on his neighbor and says, “I was only joking!”20 Where there is no wood, the fire goes out,And where there is no slanderer, quarreling ceases.21 As charcoal for the embers and wood for the fire,So a contentious man kindles a quarrel.22 The words of a slanderer are like tasty morsels;They are gulped right down into the stomach.23 Like a silver glazing over a piece of earthenwareAre affectionate words from an evil heart.24 The one who hates others disguises it with his lips,But inside he harbors deceit.25 Although he speaks graciously, do not trust him,For there are seven detestable things in his heart.26 Though his hatred is concealed by deceit,His evil will be exposed in the congregation.27 The one who digs a pit will fall into it,And whoever rolls away a stone—it will come back on him.28 A lying tongue hates those crushed by it,And a flattering mouth causes ruin.
27 Do not boast about tomorrow,For you do not know what a day will bring. 2 Let someone else praise you, and not your own mouth;Others, and not your own lips. 3 A stone is heavy and sand is weighty,But the irritation caused by a fool is heavier than both. 4 There is the cruelty of rage and the flood of anger,But who can withstand jealousy? 5 Open reproof is better than concealed love. 6 The wounds inflicted by a friend are faithful,But an enemy’s kisses are plentiful. 7 One whose appetite is satisfied turns down honey from the comb,But to the hungry, even what is bitter tastes sweet. 8 Like a bird that strays from its nestIs a man who strays from his home. 9 Oil and incense make the heart rejoice;So does sweet friendship springing from sincere counsel.10 Do not forsake your friend or your father’s friend,And do not enter your own brother’s house on the day of your disaster;Better is a neighbor nearby than a brother far away.11 Be wise, my son, and make my heart rejoice,So that I can make a reply to him who taunts me.12 The shrewd person sees the danger and conceals himself,But the inexperienced keep right on going and suffer the consequences.13 Take a man’s garment if he has given security for a stranger;Seize the pledge from him if he did so for a foreign woman.14 When someone blesses his fellow man with a loud voice early in the morning,It will be counted as a curse to him.15 A quarrelsome wife is like a constantly leaking roof on a rainy day.16 Whoever can restrain her can restrain the windAnd can grip oil with his right hand.17 As iron sharpens iron,So one man sharpens his friend.18 The one who cares for a fig tree will eat its fruit,And the one who takes care of his master will be honored.19 As water reflects one’s face,So the heart of one man reflects another’s.20 The Grave and the place of destruction are never satisfied,Nor are a man’s eyes ever satisfied.21 As the refining pot is for silver and the furnace for gold,So a person is tested by the praise he receives.22 Even if you pound a fool with a pestleLike crushed grain in a mortar,His foolishness will not leave him.23 You should know well the appearance of your flock.Take good care of your sheep,24 For wealth does not last forever,Nor a crown for all generations.25 The green grass disappears, new grass appears,And the vegetation of the mountains is gathered in.26 The young rams provide your clothing,And the male goats provide the price of a field.27 And there will be enough goat’s milk to feed you,To feed your household, and to sustain your servant girls.
28 The wicked flee when no one pursues them,But the righteous are as confident as a lion. 2 When there is transgression in the land, it will have one prince after another,But with the help of a man of discernment and knowledge, a prince will long endure. 3 A poor man who defrauds the lowlyIs like a rain that sweeps away all the food. 4 Those who abandon the law praise the wicked one,But those who observe the law are indignant with them. 5 Evil men cannot understand justice,But those who seek Jehovah can understand everything. 6 Better is a poor man who walks in his integrityThan a rich man whose ways are corrupt. 7 An understanding son observes the law,But a companion of gluttons disgraces his father. 8 The one who increases his wealth by interest and usuryAmasses it for the one who shows favor to the poor. 9 The one refusing to listen to the law—Even his prayer is detestable.10 The one misleading the upright into an evil course will fall into his own pit,But the blameless will inherit what is good.11 A rich man is wise in his own eyes,But a poor man with discernment can see through him.12 When the righteous triumph, there is great glory,But when the wicked rise to power, people go into hiding.13 The one covering over his transgressions will not succeed,But whoever confesses and abandons them will be shown mercy.14 Happy is the man who is always on guard,But whoever hardens his heart will fall into calamity.15 Like a growling lion and a charging bearIs a wicked ruler over a helpless people.16 A leader without discernment abuses his power,But the one hating dishonest profit will prolong his life.17 A man burdened with bloodguilt for taking someone’s life will keep fleeing until the grave.Let no one support him.18 The one walking faultlessly will be saved,But the one whose ways are crooked will suddenly fall.19 The one cultivating his ground will have plenty of bread,But the one taking up worthless pursuits will have his fill of poverty.20 A faithful man will receive many blessings,But the one hastening to get rich will not remain innocent.21 It is not good to show partiality;But a man might do wrong for a piece of bread.22 An envious man is eager for wealth,Not knowing that poverty will overtake him.23 Whoever reproves a man will afterward find more favorThan someone who flatters with his tongue.24 Whoever robs his father and mother and says, “It is not wrong,”Is a partner of the man who causes ruin.25 The greedy person stirs up dissension,But whoever relies on Jehovah will prosper.26 Whoever trusts in his own heart is stupid,But the one who walks in wisdom will escape.27 Whoever gives to the poor will lack nothing,But the one who closes his eyes to them will receive many curses.28 When the wicked rise to power, a man hides himself,But when they perish, the righteous increase.
29 A man who stiffens his neck after much reproofWill suddenly be broken beyond healing. 2 When the righteous are many, the people rejoice,But when the wicked one rules, the people groan. 3 A man who loves wisdom makes his father rejoice,But the one who keeps company with prostitutes squanders his wealth. 4 By justice a king brings stability to a land,But a man seeking bribes brings it to ruin. 5 A man who flatters his neighborSpreads out a net for his feet. 6 A bad man’s transgression ensnares him,But the righteous one cries out joyfully and rejoices. 7 The righteous one is concerned about the legal rights of the poor,But the wicked one has no such concern. 8 Boastful men inflame a town,But those who are wise turn away anger. 9 When a wise man enters into a controversy with a fool,There will be ranting and ridicule, but no satisfaction.10 Bloodthirsty men hate anyone innocent,And they seek to take the life of the upright.11 A stupid person gives vent to all his feelings,But the wise one calmly keeps them in check.12 When a ruler pays attention to lies,All his servants will be wicked.13 The poor man and the oppressor have this in common:Jehovah gives light to the eyes of both.14 When a king judges the poor fairly,His throne will always be secure.15 The rod and reproof impart wisdom,But a child left unrestrained brings shame on his mother.16 When the wicked increase, transgression increases,But the righteous will see their downfall.17 Discipline your son and he will bring you rest;And he will give you great pleasure.18 Where there is no vision, the people go unrestrained,But happy are those who observe the law.19 A servant will not let himself be corrected by words,For though he understands, he does not obey.20 Have you seen a man hasty with his words?There is more hope for a fool than for him.21 If a servant is pampered from his youth,He will become thankless later on.22 A man prone to anger stirs up strife;Anyone disposed to rage commits many transgressions.23 The haughtiness of a man will humble him,But whoever is humble in spirit will obtain glory.24 The partner of a thief hates himself.He may hear the call to testify, but he reports nothing.25 Trembling at men is a snare,But the one trusting in Jehovah will be protected.26 Many seek an audience with a ruler,But it is from Jehovah that a man gets justice.27 An unjust man is detestable to the righteous,But the one whose way is upright is detestable to the wicked one.
3 My son, do not forget my teaching,And may your heart observe my commandments, 2 Because they will add many daysAnd years of life and peace to you. 3 Do not let loyal love and faithfulness leave you.Tie them around your neck;Write them on the tablet of your heart; 4 Then you will find favor and good insightIn the eyes of God and man. 5 Trust in Jehovah with all your heart,And do not rely on your own understanding. 6 In all your ways take notice of him,And he will make your paths straight. 7 Do not become wise in your own eyes.Fear Jehovah and turn away from bad. 8 It will be a healing to your bodyAnd refreshment for your bones. 9 Honor Jehovah with your valuable things,With the firstfruits of all your produce;10 Then your storehouses will be completely filled,And your vats will overflow with new wine.11 My son, do not reject the discipline of Jehovah,And do not loathe his reproof,12 For those whom Jehovah loves he reproves,Just as a father does a son in whom he delights.13 Happy is the man who finds wisdomAnd the man who acquires discernment;14 To gain it is better than gaining silver,And having it as profit is better than having gold.15 It is more precious than corals;Nothing you desire can compare to it.16 Long life is in its right hand;Riches and glory are in its left hand.17 Its ways are pleasant,And all its paths are peaceful.18 It is a tree of life to those who take hold of it,And those who keep firm hold of it will be called happy.19 Jehovah founded the earth in wisdom.He solidly established the heavens in discernment.20 By his knowledge the watery deeps were split apartAnd the cloudy skies dripped with dew.21 My son, do not lose sight of them.Safeguard practical wisdom and thinking ability;22 They will give you lifeAnd be an adornment for your neck;23 Then you will walk on your way in safety,And your foot will never stumble.24 When you lie down, you will have no fear;You will lie down, and your sleep will be pleasant.25 You will not fear any sudden terrorNor the storm that is coming on the wicked.26 For Jehovah will prove to be your source of confidence;He will keep your foot from being caught.27 Do not withhold good from those to whom you should give itIf it is within your power to help.28 Do not say to your neighbor, “Go away; come back later! I will give it to you tomorrow,”If you can give it now.29 Do not plot harm against your neighborWhen he lives in a sense of security with you.30 Do not quarrel with a man for no reasonIf he has done nothing bad to you.31 Do not envy the violent manNor choose any of his ways,32 For Jehovah detests a devious person,But His close friendship is with the upright.33 The curse of Jehovah is on the house of the wicked one,But he blesses the home of the righteous.34 For he mocks those who ridicule,But he shows favor to the meek.35 The wise will inherit honor,But the stupid ones glorify dishonor.
30 The weighty message contained in the words of Aʹgur son of Jaʹkeh, which he spoke to Ithʹi·el, to Ithʹi·el and Uʹcal. 2 I am more ignorant than anyone else,And I lack the understanding a man should have. 3 I have not learned wisdom,And I do not possess the knowledge of the Most Holy One. 4 Who has ascended to heaven and then descended?Who has gathered the wind in the palms of both hands?Who has wrapped up the waters in his garment?Who has established all the ends of the earth?What is his name and the name of his son—if you know? 5 Every saying of God is refined.He is a shield to those taking refuge in him. 6 Add nothing to his words,Or he will reprove you,And you will be proved a liar. 7 Two things I ask of you.Do not withhold them from me before I die. 8 Remove untruth and lies far from me.Give me neither poverty nor riches.Just let me consume my portion of food, 9 So that I do not become satisfied and deny you and say, “Who is Jehovah?”Nor let me become poor and steal and dishonor the name of my God.10 Do not slander a servant to his master,Or he may curse you and you will be found guilty.11 There is a generation that curses its fatherAnd does not bless its mother.12 There is a generation that is pure in its own eyesBut has not been cleansed from its filth.13 There is a generation whose eyes are so haughtyAnd whose eyes look so arrogantly!14 There is a generation whose teeth are swordsAnd whose jaws are slaughtering knives;They devour the lowly ones of the earthAnd the poor from among mankind.15 The leeches have two daughters that cry, “Give! Give!”There are three things that do not get satisfied,Four that never say, “Enough!”16 —The Grave and a barren womb,A land that is deprived of water,And fire that never says, “Enough!”17 The eye that mocks a father and despises obedience to a mother—The ravens of the valley will peck it out,And the young eagles will eat it up.18 There are three things that are beyond my comprehension,And four that I do not understand:19 The way of an eagle in the heavens,The way of a serpent on a rock,The way of a ship in the open sea,And the way of a man with a young woman.20 This is the way of an adulterous woman:She eats, she wipes her mouth;Then she says, “I have done nothing wrong.”21 There are three things that make the earth shudderAnd four things it cannot endure:22 When a slave rules as king,When a fool is glutted with food,23 When a hated woman is taken as a wife,And when a servant girl takes the place of her mistress.24 Four things on earth are among the smallest,But they are instinctively wise:25 The ants are not strong creatures,Yet they prepare their food in the summer.26 The rock badgers are not mighty creatures,Yet they make their house in the crags.27 The locusts have no king,Yet they all go forward in formation.28 The gecko lizard clings with its feet,And it goes into the palace of a king.29 There are three things that have an impressive stride,Four that are impressive as they move:30 The lion, the mightiest among beasts,Which does not retreat from anyone;31 The greyhound; the male goat;And a king whose army is with him.32 If you have foolishly exalted yourselfOr if you have schemed to do so,Put your hand over your mouth.33 For as the churning of milk produces butterAnd the squeezing of the nose produces blood,So the stirring up of anger produces quarrels.
31 The words of King Lemʹu·el, the weighty message his mother gave to instruct him: 2 What should I tell you, O my son,What, O son of my womb,And what, O son of my vows? 3 Do not give your vigor to women,Nor follow ways that destroy kings. 4 It is not for kings, O Lemʹu·el,It is not for kings to drink wineNor for rulers to say, “Where is my drink?” 5 So that they do not drink and forget what is decreedAnd pervert the rights of the lowly ones. 6 Give alcohol to those who are perishingAnd wine to those in bitter distress. 7 Let them drink and forget their poverty;Let them remember their trouble no more. 8 Speak up in behalf of the speechless;Defend the rights of all who are perishing. 9 Speak up and judge righteously;Defend the rights of the lowly and the poor.10 Who can find a capable wife?Her value is far more than that of corals.11 Her husband trusts her from his heart,And he lacks nothing of value.12 She rewards him with good, not bad,All the days of her life.13 She obtains wool and linen;She delights to work with her hands.14 She is like the ships of a merchant,Bringing her food in from afar.15 She also rises while it is still night,Providing food for her householdAnd portions for her female servants.16 She sets her mind on a field and buys it;She plants a vineyard from her own labors.17 She prepares herself for hard work,And she strengthens her arms.18 She sees that her trading is profitable;Her lamp does not go out at night.19 Her hands seize the distaff,And her hands take hold of the spindle.20 She extends her palm to the lowly one,And she opens her hands to the poor.21 She does not worry about her household because of the snow,For her whole household is clothed in warm garments.22 She makes her own bed covers.Her clothing is of linen and purple wool.23 Her husband is well-known in the city gates,Where he sits among the elders of the land.24 She makes and sells linen garmentsAnd supplies belts to the merchants.25 She is clothed with strength and splendor,And she looks to the future with confidence.26 She opens her mouth in wisdom;The law of kindness is on her tongue.27 She watches over the activity of her household,And the bread of laziness she does not eat.28 Her children rise up and declare her happy;Her husband rises up and praises her.29 There are many capable women,But you—you surpass them all.30 Charm may be false, and beauty may be fleeting,But the woman who fears Jehovah will be praised.31 Give her the reward for what she does,And let her works praise her in the city gates.
4 Listen, my sons, to the discipline of a father;Pay attention in order to gain understanding, 2 For I will give you good instruction;Do not forsake my teaching. 3 I was a true son to my fatherAnd the one especially loved by my mother. 4 He taught me and said: “May your heart hold fast to my words.Keep my commandments and continue living. 5 Acquire wisdom, acquire understanding.Do not forget, and do not turn aside from what I say. 6 Do not forsake it, and it will protect you.Love it, and it will safeguard you. 7 Wisdom is the most important thing, so acquire wisdom,And with all you acquire, acquire understanding. 8 Highly esteem it, and it will exalt you.It will honor you because you embrace it. 9 It will place an attractive wreath on your head;It will adorn you with a crown of beauty.”10 Listen, my son, and accept my sayings,And the years of your life will be many.11 I will instruct you in the way of wisdom;I will lead you in the tracks of uprightness.12 When you walk, your steps will not be hindered;And if you run, you will not stumble.13 Hold on to discipline; do not let it go.Safeguard it, for it means your life.14 Do not enter the path of the wicked,And do not walk in the way of evil men.15 Shun it, do not take it;Turn away from it, and pass it by.16 For they cannot sleep unless they do what is bad.They are robbed of sleep unless they cause someone’s downfall.17 They feed themselves with the bread of wickedness,And they drink the wine of violence.18 But the path of the righteous is like the bright morning lightThat grows brighter and brighter until full daylight.19 The way of the wicked is like the darkness;They do not know what makes them stumble.20 My son, pay attention to my words;Listen carefully to my sayings.21 Do not lose sight of them;Keep them deep within your heart,22 For they are life to those who find themAnd health to their whole body.23 Above all the things that you guard, safeguard your heart,For out of it are the sources of life.24 Put crooked speech away from you,And keep devious talk far away from you.25 Your eyes should look straight ahead,Yes, fix your gaze straight ahead of you.26 Smooth out the course of your feet,And all your ways will be sure.27 Do not incline to the right or the left.Turn your feet away from what is bad.
5 My son, pay attention to my wisdom.Listen carefully to my discernment, 2 So that you may guard your thinking abilitiesAnd safeguard knowledge with your lips. 3 For the lips of a wayward woman drip like a honeycomb,And her mouth is smoother than oil. 4 But in the end she is as bitter as wormwoodAnd as sharp as a two-edged sword. 5 Her feet descend into death.Her steps lead straight to the Grave. 6 She gives no thought to the path of life.Her course wanders, but she does not know where. 7 Now, my sons, listen to meAnd do not turn away from what I am saying. 8 Stay far away from her;Do not go near the entrance of her house, 9 So that you may not give your dignity to othersNor reap years of what is cruel;10 So that strangers may not drain your resourcesAnd what you labored for go to the house of a foreigner.11 Otherwise, you will groan at the end of your lifeWhen your flesh and body waste away12 And you say: “How I hated discipline!How my heart despised reproof!13 I did not listen to the voice of my instructorsOr pay attention to my teachers.14 I have come to the brink of complete ruinIn the midst of the entire congregation.”15 Drink water from your own cisternAnd flowing water from your own well.16 Should your springs be dispersed outside,Your streams of water in the public squares?17 Let them be for you alone,And not for strangers with you.18 May your own fountain be blessed,And may you rejoice with the wife of your youth,19 A loving doe, a graceful mountain goat.Let her breasts satisfy you at all times.May you be captivated by her love constantly.20 So why, my son, should you be captivated by a wayward womanOr embrace the bosom of an immoral woman?21 For the ways of man are before the eyes of Jehovah;He examines all his paths.22 The wicked one is ensnared by his own errors,And he will be caught in the ropes of his own sin.23 He will die for lack of disciplineAnd go astray because of his excessive foolishness.
6 My son, if you have put up security for your neighbor,If you have given your handshake to a stranger, 2 If you have been ensnared by your promise,Caught by the words of your mouth, 3 Do this, my son, and free yourself,For you have fallen into the hand of your neighbor:Go and humble yourself and urgently plead with your neighbor. 4 Do not allow your eyes to sleep,Nor your eyelids to slumber. 5 Free yourself like a gazelle from the hunter’s hand,Like a bird from the hand of the birdcatcher. 6 Go to the ant, you lazy one;Observe its ways and become wise. 7 Although it has no commander, officer, or ruler, 8 It prepares its food in the summer,And it gathers its food supplies in the harvest. 9 How long, you lazy one, will you lie there?When will you rise up from your sleep?10 A little sleep, a little slumbering,A little folding of the hands to rest,11 And your poverty will come like a bandit,And your want like an armed man.12 A useless and wicked man walks about with crooked speech;13 He winks with his eye, signals with his foot, and motions with his fingers.14 With a perverted heart,He is always scheming evil and spreading contentions.15 Therefore, his disaster will come suddenly;In a moment he will be broken beyond healing.16 There are six things that Jehovah hates;Yes, seven things that he detests:17 Haughty eyes, a lying tongue, and hands that shed innocent blood,18 A heart plotting wicked schemes, and feet that run quickly to evil,19 A false witness who lies with every breath,And anyone sowing contentions among brothers.20 Observe, my son, the commandment of your father,And do not forsake the instruction of your mother.21 Always bind them around your heart;Tie them about your neck.22 When you walk about, it will lead you;When you lie down, it will stand guard over you;And when you awaken, it will speak to you.23 For the commandment is a lamp,And the law is a light,And the reproofs of discipline are the way to life.24 They will guard you against the bad woman,Against the seductive tongue of the immoral woman.25 Do not desire her beauty in your heartOr allow her to captivate you with her alluring eyes,26 For because of a prostitute, a man is reduced to a loaf of bread,But the wife of another man preys on a precious life.27 Can a man rake fire to his chest and not burn his garments?28 Or can a man walk on hot coals without scorching his feet?29 It is the same with anyone having relations with his neighbor’s wife;No one who touches her will go unpunished.30 People do not despise a thiefIf he steals to satisfy himself when he is hungry.31 Yet, when found, he will repay sevenfold;He will give up all the valuables of his house.32 Anyone committing adultery with a woman is lacking good sense;The one who does so brings ruin on himself.33 He will get only wounds and dishonor,And his disgrace will not be wiped away.34 For jealousy makes a husband furious;He will show no compassion when he takes revenge.35 He will accept no compensation;He will not be appeased, no matter how large you make the gift.
7 My son, keep my sayings,And treasure up my commandments. 2 Keep my commandments and live;Guard my instruction like the pupil of your eye. 3 Tie them around your fingers;Write them on the tablet of your heart. 4 Say to wisdom, “You are my sister,”And call understanding “my relative,” 5 To guard you against the wayward woman,Against the immoral woman and her smooth words. 6 From the window of my house,Through my lattice, I looked down, 7 And as I observed the naive ones,I discerned among the youths a young man lacking good sense. 8 He passed along the street near her corner,And he marched in the direction of her house 9 In the twilight, in the evening,At the approach of night and darkness.10 Then I saw a woman meet him,Dressed like a prostitute, with a cunning heart.11 She is loud and defiant.She never stays at home.12 One moment she is outside, next she is in the public squares,She lurks near every corner.13 She grabs hold of him and gives him a kiss;With a bold face, she says to him:14 “I had to offer communion sacrifices.Today I paid my vows.15 That is why I came out to meet you,To look for you, and I found you!16 I have spread fine covers upon my bed,Colorful linen from Egypt.17 I have sprinkled my bed with myrrh, aloes, and cinnamon.18 Come, let us drink our fill of love until the morning;Let us enjoy passionate love together,19 For my husband is not at home;He has gone on a distant journey.20 He took a bag of money with him,And he will not return until the day of the full moon.”21 She misleads him with great persuasiveness.She seduces him with smooth speech.22 Suddenly he goes after her, like a bull to the slaughter,Like a fool to be punished in the stocks,23 Until an arrow pierces his liver;Like a bird rushing into a trap, he does not know that it will cost him his life.24 And now, my sons, listen to me;Pay attention to the words I speak.25 Do not let your heart turn aside to her ways.Do not stray onto her paths,26 For she has caused many to fall down slain,And those she has killed are numerous.27 Her house leads to the Grave;It goes down to the inner chambers of death.
8 Is not wisdom calling out?Is not discernment raising its voice? 2 On the heights along the road,It takes its position at the crossroads. 3 Next to the gates leading into the city,At the entrances of the doorways,It keeps crying out loudly: 4 “To you, O people, I am calling;I raise my voice to everyone. 5 You inexperienced ones, learn shrewdness;You stupid ones, acquire an understanding heart. 6 Listen, for what I say is important,My lips speak what is right; 7 For my mouth softly utters truth,And my lips detest what is wicked. 8 All the sayings of my mouth are righteous.None of them are twisted or crooked. 9 They are all straightforward to the discerningAnd right to those who have found knowledge.10 Take my discipline instead of silver,And knowledge rather than the finest gold,11 For wisdom is better than corals;All other desirable things cannot compare to it.12 I, wisdom, dwell together with shrewdness;I have found knowledge and thinking ability.13 The fear of Jehovah means the hating of bad.I hate self-exaltation and pride and the evil way and perverse speech.14 I possess good advice and practical wisdom;Understanding and power are mine.15 By me kings keep reigning,And high officials decree righteousness.16 By me princes keep ruling,And nobles judge in righteousness.17 I love those loving me,And those seeking me will find me.18 Riches and glory are with me,Lasting wealth and righteousness.19 My fruitage is better than gold, even refined gold,And what I produce is better than the finest silver.20 I walk in the path of righteousness,In the middle of the pathways of justice;21 I give a rich inheritance to those who love me,And I fill up their storehouses.22 Jehovah produced me as the beginning of his way,The earliest of his achievements of long ago.23 From ancient times I was installed,From the start, from times earlier than the earth.24 When there were no deep waters, I was brought forth,When there were no springs overflowing with water.25 Before the mountains were set in place,Before the hills, I was brought forth,26 When he had not yet made the earth and its fieldsOr the first clods of earth’s soil.27 When he prepared the heavens, I was there;When he marked out the horizon on the surface of the waters,28 When he established the clouds above,When he founded the fountains of the deep,29 When he set a decree for the seaThat its waters should not pass beyond his order,When he established the foundations of the earth,30 Then I was beside him as a master worker.I was the one he was especially fond of day by day;I rejoiced before him all the time;31 I rejoiced over his habitable earth,And I was especially fond of the sons of men.32 And now, my sons, listen to me;Yes, happy are those who keep my ways.33 Listen to discipline and become wise,And never neglect it.34 Happy is the man who listens to meBy coming early to my doors day by day,By waiting next to my doorposts;35 For the one finding me will find life,And he receives approval from Jehovah.36 But the one who ignores me harms himself,And those who hate me love death.”
9 True wisdom has built its house;It has carved out its seven pillars. 2 It has fully prepared its meat;It has mixed its wine;It has also arranged its table. 3 It has sent out its female servantsTo call out from the heights above the city: 4 “Whoever is inexperienced, let him come in here.”She says to the one lacking good sense: 5 “Come, eat my breadAnd share in drinking the wine that I have mixed. 6 Leave behind your inexperience and live;Walk forward in the way of understanding.” 7 The one who corrects a ridiculer invites dishonor,And whoever reproves someone wicked will get hurt. 8 Do not reprove a ridiculer, or he will hate you.Reprove a wise person, and he will love you. 9 Share with a wise person, and he will become wiser.Teach someone righteous, and he will add to his learning.10 The fear of Jehovah is the beginning of wisdom,And knowledge of the Most Holy One is understanding.11 For by me your days will be many,And years will be added to your life.12 If you become wise, you are wise to your own advantage,But if you are a ridiculer, you alone will bear it.13 A stupid woman is loud.She is ignorant and knows absolutely nothing.14 She sits at the entrance of her houseOn a seat in the high places of the city,15 Calling out to those passing by,To those walking straight ahead on their way:16 “Whoever is inexperienced, let him come in here.”She says to those lacking good sense:17 “Stolen waters are sweet,And food eaten in secret is pleasant.”18 But he does not know that those powerless in death are there,That her guests are in the depths of the Grave.
1 The proverbs of Solʹo·mon, the son of David, the king of Israel: 2 To learn wisdom and discipline;To understand wise sayings; 3 To acquire the discipline that gives insight,Righteousness, good judgment, and uprightness; 4 To impart shrewdness to the inexperienced;To give a young man knowledge and thinking ability. 5 A wise person listens and takes in more instruction;A man of understanding acquires skillful direction 6 To understand a proverb and a puzzling saying,The words of the wise and their riddles. 7 The fear of Jehovah is the beginning of knowledge.Only fools despise wisdom and discipline. 8 Listen, my son, to the discipline of your father,And do not forsake the instruction of your mother. 9 They are an attractive wreath for your headAnd a fine ornament for your neck.10 My son, if sinners try to entice you, do not consent.11 If they say: “Come with us.Let us set an ambush to shed blood.We will lie hidden, waiting for innocent victims without cause.12 We will swallow them alive as the Grave does,Whole, like those going down to the pit.13 Let us seize all their precious treasures;We will fill our houses with spoil.14 You should join us,And we will all share equally what we steal.”15 My son, do not follow them.Keep your feet off their path,16 For their feet run to do evil;They hurry to shed blood.17 It is surely in vain to spread a net in full sight of a bird.18 That is why these lie in ambush to shed blood;They lie hidden to take the lives of others.19 These are the ways of those seeking dishonest profit,Which will take away the life of those who obtain it.20 True wisdom cries aloud in the street.It keeps raising its voice in the public squares.21 At the corner of the busy streets it calls out.At the entrances of the city gates it says:22 “How long will you inexperienced ones love inexperience?How long will you ridiculers take pleasure in ridicule?And how long will you foolish ones hate knowledge?23 Respond to my reproof.Then I will pour out my spirit for you;I will make my words known to you.24 Because I called out, but you kept refusing,I stretched out my hand, but no one was paying attention,25 You kept neglecting all my adviceAnd rejecting my reproof,26 I also will laugh when disaster strikes you;I will mock when what you dread comes,27 When what you dread comes like a storm,And your disaster arrives like a storm wind,When distress and trouble come upon you.28 At that time they will keep calling me, but I will not answer;They will eagerly look for me, but they will not find me,29 Because they hated knowledge,And they did not choose to fear Jehovah.30 They refused my advice;They disrespected all my reproof.31 So they will bear the consequences of their way,And they will be glutted with their own counsel.32 For the waywardness of the inexperienced will kill them,And the complacency of fools will destroy them.33 But the one listening to me will dwell in securityAnd be undisturbed by the dread of calamity.”
10 As dead flies cause the perfumer’s oil to stink and bubble, so a little foolishness outweighs wisdom and glory.2 The heart of the wise one leads him in the right way, but the heart of the stupid one leads him in the wrong way. 3 In whatever way the fool walks, he is lacking good sense, and he lets everyone know that he is a fool.4 If the anger of a ruler should flare up against you, do not leave your place, for calmness allays great sins.5 There is something distressing that I have seen under the sun, the sort of mistake made by those in power: 6 Foolishness is put in many high positions, but the rich remain in low positions.7 I have seen servants on horseback but princes walking on foot just like servants.8 The one who digs a pit may fall into it; and the one who breaks through a stone wall may be bitten by a snake.9 The one who quarries stones may be hurt by them, and the one who splits logs may be endangered by them.10 If an iron tool is dull and one does not sharpen its edge, he will need to exert much effort. But wisdom helps to achieve success.11 If the snake bites before it is charmed, there is no advantage to the skilled charmer.12 The words from the mouth of the wise one bring favor, but the lips of the stupid one are his ruin. 13 The first words out of his mouth are foolishness, and his last words are disastrous madness. 14 But the fool keeps on speaking.A man does not know what will happen; who can tell him what will come after him?15 The hard work of the stupid one wears him out, for he does not even know how to find his way to the city.16 How terrible for a land when the king is a boy and the princes start their feasting in the morning! 17 How happy for the land when the king is the son of nobles and the princes eat at the proper time for strength, not for drunkenness!18 Because of extreme laziness the roof beams sag, and because of idle hands the house leaks.19 Bread is made for laughter, and wine makes life enjoyable; but money answers every need.20 Even in your thoughts, do not curse the king, and do not curse the rich in your bedroom; for a bird may convey the sound, or a creature with wings may repeat what was said.
11 Cast your bread on the waters, for after many days you will find it again. 2 Give a share to seven or even to eight, for you do not know what disaster will occur on the earth.3 If the clouds are filled with water, they will pour down rain on the earth; and if a tree falls to the south or to the north, the place where the tree falls is where it will lie.4 The one who watches the wind will not sow seed, and the one who looks at the clouds will not reap.5 Just as you do not know how the spirit operates in the bones of the child inside a pregnant woman, so you do not know the work of the true God, who does all things.6 Sow your seed in the morning and do not let your hand rest until the evening; for you do not know which will have success, whether this one or that one, or whether they will both do well.7 Light is sweet, and it is good for the eyes to see the sun. 8 For if a man should live many years, let him enjoy them all. But he should remember that the days of darkness may be many; all that is to come is futility.9 Rejoice, young man, while you are young, and let your heart be glad in the days of your youth. Follow the ways of your heart and go where your eyes lead you; but know that the true God will bring you into judgment for all these things. 10 So remove troublesome things from your heart, and ward off harmful things from your body, for youth and the prime of life are futility.
12 Remember, then, your Grand Creator in the days of your youth, before the days of distress come and the years arrive when you will say: “I have no pleasure in them”; 2 before the sun and the light and the moon and the stars grow dark, and the clouds return after the downpour; 3 in the day when the guards of the house become shaky, and the strong men stoop over, and the women quit grinding because they have become few, and the ladies looking out the windows find it dark; 4 when the doors to the street have been closed, when the sound of the grinding mill becomes low, when one gets up at the sound of a bird, and all the daughters of song grow faint. 5 Also, one is afraid of heights, and there are terrors in the street. And the almond tree blossoms, and the grasshopper drags itself along, and the caper berry bursts, because man is walking to his lasting house and the mourners walk about in the street; 6 before the silver cord is removed, and the golden bowl is crushed, and the jar at the spring is broken, and the waterwheel for the cistern is crushed. 7 Then the dust returns to the earth, just as it was, and the spirit returns to the true God who gave it.8 “The greatest futility!” says the congregator. “Everything is futile.”9 Not only had the congregator become wise but he continually taught the people what he knew, and he pondered and made a thorough search in order to compile many proverbs. 10 The congregator sought to find delightful words and to record accurate words of truth.11 The words of the wise are like oxgoads, and their collected sayings are like firmly embedded nails; they have been given from one shepherd. 12 As for anything besides these, my son, be warned: To the making of many books there is no end, and much devotion to them is wearisome to the flesh.13 The conclusion of the matter, everything having been heard, is: Fear the true God and keep his commandments, for this is the whole obligation of man. 14 For the true God will judge every deed, including every hidden thing, as to whether it is good or bad.
2 Then I said in my heart: “Come and let me try out pleasure and see what good comes.” But look! that too was futility. 2 I said about laughter, “It is madness!”And about pleasure, “What use is it?”3 I explored with my heart by indulging myself with wine, all the while maintaining my own wisdom; I even embraced foolishness to find out what was the best thing for humans to do during their few days of life under the heavens. 4 I undertook great works. I built houses for myself; I planted vineyards for myself. 5 I made gardens and parks for myself, and I planted in them all sorts of fruit trees. 6 I made pools of water for myself, to irrigate a grove of flourishing trees. 7 I acquired male and female servants, and I had servants born in my household. I also acquired much livestock—cattle and flocks—more than any of my predecessors in Jerusalem. 8 I accumulated silver and gold for myself, the treasures of kings and of provinces. I gathered male and female singers for myself, as well as what brings great pleasure to the sons of men—a woman, yes, many women. 9 So I grew great and surpassed anyone prior to me in Jerusalem. And my wisdom remained with me.10 I did not deny myself anything that I desired. I did not withhold from my heart any sort of pleasure, for my heart was joyful because of all my hard work, and this was my reward for all my hard work. 11 But when I reflected on all the works that my own hands had done and on all the hard work that I had toiled to accomplish, I saw that everything was futile, a chasing after the wind; there was nothing of real value under the sun.12 Then I turned my attention to wisdom and madness and folly. (For what can the man do who comes after the king? Only what has already been done.) 13 And I saw that there is an advantage to wisdom over folly, just as there is an advantage to light over darkness.14 The wise one has his eyes in his head; but the stupid one is walking in darkness. I have also come to realize that there is one outcome that befalls all of them. 15 Then I said in my heart: “What happens to the stupid one will also happen to me.” What, then, did I gain by becoming excessively wise? So I said in my heart: “This too is futility.” 16 For there is no lasting memory either of the wise one or of the stupid one. In the days to come, everyone will be forgotten. And how will the wise one die? Along with the stupid one.17 So I came to hate life, because everything being done under the sun seemed distressing to me, for everything was futile, a chasing after the wind. 18 I came to hate all that I had worked so hard for under the sun, because I must leave it behind for the man coming after me. 19 And who knows whether he will be wise or foolish? Yet he will take control over all the things I spent great effort and wisdom to acquire under the sun. This too is futility. 20 So I began to despair in my heart over all the hard work at which I had toiled under the sun. 21 For a man may work hard, guided by wisdom and knowledge and skill, but he must hand over his portion to a man who did not work for it. This too is futility and a great tragedy.22 What does a man really gain from all his hard work and ambition that drives him to work hard under the sun? 23 For during all his days, his occupation brings pain and frustration, and even at night his heart does not rest. This too is futility.24 There is nothing better for a man than to eat and drink and find enjoyment in his hard work. This too, I have realized, is from the hand of the true God, 25 for who eats and who drinks better than I do?26 To the man who pleases him he gives wisdom and knowledge and rejoicing, but to the sinner he gives the occupation of gathering and merely collecting to give to the one who pleases the true God. This too is futility, a chasing after the wind.
3 There is an appointed time for everything,A time for every activity under the heavens: 2 A time for birth and a time to die;A time to plant and a time to uproot what was planted; 3 A time to kill and a time to heal;A time to tear down and a time to build up; 4 A time to weep and a time to laugh;A time to wail and a time to dance; 5 A time to throw stones away and a time to gather stones together;A time to embrace and a time to refrain from embracing; 6 A time to search and a time to give up as lost;A time to keep and a time to throw away; 7 A time to rip apart and a time to sew together;A time to be silent and a time to speak; 8 A time to love and a time to hate;A time for war and a time for peace.9 What does the worker gain from all his efforts? 10 I have seen the occupation that God has given to the sons of men to keep them occupied. 11 He has made everything beautiful in its time. He has even put eternity in their heart; yet mankind will never find out the work that the true God has made from start to finish.12 I have concluded that there is nothing better for them than to rejoice and to do good during their life, 13 also that everyone should eat and drink and find enjoyment for all his hard work. It is the gift of God.14 I have come to know that everything the true God makes will endure forever. There is nothing to add to it and nothing to subtract from it. The true God has made it this way, so that people will fear him.15 Whatever happens has already happened, and what is to come has already been; but the true God seeks what has been pursued.16 I have also seen this under the sun: In the place of justice there was wickedness, and in the place of righteousness there was wickedness. 17 So I said in my heart: “The true God will judge both the righteous and the wicked, for there is a time for every activity and every action.”18 I also said in my heart about the sons of men that the true God will test them and show them that they are like animals, 19 for there is an outcome for humans and an outcome for animals; they all have the same outcome. As the one dies, so the other dies; and they all have but one spirit. So man has no superiority over animals, for everything is futile. 20 All are going to the same place. They all come from the dust, and they all are returning to the dust. 21 Who really knows whether the spirit of humans ascends upward, and whether the spirit of animals descends down to the earth? 22 And I saw that there is nothing better than for a man to find enjoyment in his work, because that is his reward; for who can enable him to see what will happen after he is gone?
4 Again I turned my attention to all the acts of oppression that go on under the sun. I saw the tears of the oppressed, and there was no one to comfort them. And their oppressors had the power, and there was no one to comfort them. 2 And I congratulated the dead who had already died rather than the living who were still alive. 3 And better off than both of them is the one who has not yet been born, who has not seen the distressing deeds that are done under the sun.4 And I have seen how much effort and skillful work spring from rivalry between people; this too is futility, a chasing after the wind.5 The stupid one folds his hands while his flesh wastes away.6 Better is a handful of rest than two handfuls of hard work and chasing after the wind.7 I turned my attention to another example of futility under the sun: 8 There is a man who is all alone, without any companion; he has no son or brother, but there is no end to all his hard work. His eyes are never satisfied with riches. But does he ask himself, ‘For whom am I working hard and depriving myself of good things’? This too is futility and a miserable occupation.9 Two are better than one because they have a good reward for their hard work. 10 For if one of them falls, the other can help his partner up. But what will happen to the one who falls with no one to help him up?11 Moreover, if two lie down together, they will stay warm, but how can just one keep warm? 12 And someone may overpower one alone, but two together can take a stand against him. And a threefold cord cannot quickly be torn apart.13 Better is a poor but wise child than an old but stupid king, who no longer has enough sense to heed a warning. 14 For he went out from prison to become king, although in that one’s kingship he was born poor. 15 I considered all those alive who walk about under the sun, as well as how it goes with the young successor who stands up in the other’s place. 16 Although there is no end to all his supporters, those who come later will not be happy with him. This too is futility, a chasing after the wind.
5 Watch your step whenever you go to the house of the true God; it is better to draw near to listen than to give a sacrifice as the stupid ones do, for they are not aware that what they are doing is bad.2 Do not be quick with your mouth, nor let your heart speak rashly before the true God, for the true God is in the heavens but you are on the earth. That is why your words should be few. 3 For a dream comes from too many preoccupations, and the chatter of the stupid one comes from too many words. 4 Whenever you make a vow to God, do not delay to pay it, for he finds no pleasure in the stupid ones. What you vow, pay. 5 Better for you not to vow than to vow and not pay. 6 Do not allow your mouth to cause you to sin, and do not say before the angel that it was a mistake. Why make the true God indignant over what you say so that he has to destroy the work of your hands? 7 For just as many preoccupations lead to dreams, so, too, many words lead to futility. But fear the true God.8 If you see any oppression of the poor and a violation of justice and righteousness in your district, do not be surprised about the matter. For that high official is being watched by one who is higher than he is, and there are others who are still higher than them.9 Also, the profit of the land is divided among them all; even the king is served by the field.10 A lover of silver will never be satisfied with silver, nor a lover of wealth with income. This too is futility.11 When good things increase, those consuming them increase. And what advantage is it to the owner, except to look at them with his eyes?12 Sweet is the sleep of the one serving, whether he eats little or much, but the plenty belonging to the rich one does not permit him to sleep.13 There is a great tragedy that I have seen under the sun: riches that were hoarded by their owner to his own harm. 14 Those riches were lost because of a disastrous venture, and when he becomes a father to a son, he has nothing left in his possession.15 Just as one came from his mother’s womb, naked he will go away, just as he came. And he cannot carry away anything for all his hard work.16 This too is a great tragedy: Exactly as he came, so he will go away; and what profit is there to the one who keeps working hard for the wind? 17 Also, every day he eats in darkness, with a great deal of frustration and sickness and anger.18 This is what I have seen to be good and proper: that one should eat and drink and find enjoyment for all the hard work at which he toils under the sun during the few days of life that the true God has given him, for that is his reward. 19 Also, when the true God gives a man riches and material possessions along with the ability to enjoy them, he should take his reward and rejoice in his hard work. This is the gift of God. 20 For he will hardly notice the passing days of his life, because the true God keeps him preoccupied with the rejoicing of his heart.
6 There is another tragedy that I have seen under the sun, and it is common among men: 2 The true God gives a man riches and material possessions and glory, so that he lacks nothing that he desires; yet the true God does not enable him to enjoy them, although a stranger may enjoy them. This is futility and a severe affliction. 3 If a man should become a father a hundred times and live for many years and reach old age, yet he does not enjoy his good things before he reaches the grave, I must say that a stillborn child is better off than he is. 4 For this one came in vain and went away in darkness, and his name is shrouded in darkness. 5 Even though he never saw the sun or knew anything, he is still better off than the former one. 6 What is the benefit of living a thousand years twice over but not experiencing enjoyment? Do not all go to the same place?7 All the hard work of a man is to fill his mouth; yet his appetite is never satisfied. 8 For what advantage does the wise one have over the stupid one, or of what benefit is it that the poor man knows how to survive? 9 Better to enjoy what the eyes see than to wander after one’s desires. This too is futility, a chasing after the wind.10 Whatever has come to be has already been named, and it is known what man is; and he is not able to dispute with the one more powerful than he. 11 The more words, the more futility; and what advantage do they bring to man? 12 Who knows what is best for a man to do in life during the few days of his futile life, which he spends like a shadow? For who can tell man what will happen under the sun after he is gone?
7 A good name is better than good oil, and the day of death is better than the day of birth. 2 Better to go to the house of mourning than to the house of feasting, for that is the end of every man, and the living should take it to heart. 3 Better is distress than laughter, for the sadness of the face makes the heart better. 4 The heart of the wise is in the house of mourning, but the heart of the stupid is in the house of rejoicing.5 Better to listen to a wise man’s rebuke than to listen to the song of fools. 6 For as the crackling of thorns burning under the pot, so is the laughter of the fool; and this too is futility. 7 But oppression can drive the wise one into madness, and a bribe corrupts the heart.8 Better is the end of a matter than its beginning. Better to be patient than to be haughty in spirit. 9 Do not be quick to take offense, for the taking of offense lodges in the bosom of fools.10 Do not say, “Why were the former days better than these?” for it is not out of wisdom that you ask this.11 Wisdom together with an inheritance is a good thing and an advantage to those who see the light of day. 12 For wisdom is a protection just as money is a protection, but the advantage of knowledge is this: Wisdom preserves the life of its owner.13 Consider the work of the true God, for who can straighten out what he has made crooked? 14 On a good day, reflect this goodness, but on the day of adversity, consider that God made the one as well as the other, so that men cannot be certain of anything that will happen to them in the future.15 During my futile life I have seen everything—from the righteous one who perishes in his righteousness to the wicked one who lives long despite his badness.16 Do not be overly righteous, nor show yourself excessively wise. Why should you bring ruin to yourself? 17 Do not be excessively wicked, nor be foolish. Why should you die before your time? 18 It is best to grasp one warning without letting go of the other; for the one who fears God will heed them both.19 Wisdom makes a wise man more powerful than ten strong men in a city. 20 For there is no righteous man on earth who always does good and never sins.21 Also, do not take to heart every word that people say; otherwise, you may hear your servant calling down evil on you; 22 for you well know in your heart that many times you yourself have called down evil on others.23 All of this I tested with wisdom, and I said: “I will become wise.” But it was beyond me. 24 What has come to be is out of reach and exceedingly deep. Who can understand it? 25 I directed my heart to know and to explore and to search for wisdom and the reason behind things, and to understand the wickedness of stupidity and the folly of madness. 26 Then I discovered this: More bitter than death is the woman who is like a hunter’s net, whose heart is like dragnets, and whose hands are like prison chains. The one who pleases the true God will escape her, but the sinner is captured by her.27 “See, this is what I found,” says the congregator. “I investigated one thing after another to reach my conclusion, 28 but what I continually sought, I have not found. One man out of a thousand I found, but a woman among them I have not found. 29 This alone I have found: The true God made mankind upright, but they have sought out many schemes.”
8 Who is like the wise man? Who knows the solution to a problem? A man’s wisdom lights up his face and softens his stern appearance.2 I say: “Obey the king’s orders out of regard for the oath to God. 3 Do not rush to depart from his presence. Do not take a stand for anything bad; for he can do whatever he pleases, 4 because the word of the king is absolute; who can say to him, ‘What are you doing?’”5 The one who observes the commandment will not experience harm, and the wise heart will know the right time and procedure. 6 For every matter there is a time and procedure, because the troubles of mankind are so abundant. 7 Since no one knows what will happen, who can tell him how it will happen?8 Just as no man has power over the spirit or can restrain the spirit, so no one has power over the day of death. Just as no one is discharged during a war, so wickedness will not allow those who practice it to escape.9 All of this I have seen, and I applied my heart to every work that has been done under the sun, during the time that man has dominated man to his harm. 10 And I saw the wicked being buried, those who used to go in and out of the holy place, but they were soon forgotten in the city where they acted that way. This too is futility.11 Because sentence against a bad deed has not been executed speedily, the heart of men becomes emboldened to do bad. 12 Although a sinner may do bad a hundred times and still live a long time, yet I am aware that it will turn out well for those who fear the true God, because they fear him. 13 But it will not turn out well for the wicked one, nor will he prolong his days that are like a shadow, because he does not fear God.14 There is something futile that takes place on the earth: There are righteous people who are treated as if they had acted wickedly, and there are wicked people who are treated as if they had acted righteously. I say that this too is futility.15 So I recommended rejoicing, because there is nothing better for man under the sun than to eat and drink and rejoice; this should accompany him as he works hard during the days of his life, which the true God gives him under the sun.16 I applied my heart to acquire wisdom and to see all the activity happening on the earth, even going without sleep day and night. 17 Then I considered all the work of the true God, and I realized that mankind cannot comprehend what happens under the sun. No matter how hard men try, they cannot comprehend it. Even if they claim that they are wise enough to know, they cannot really comprehend it.
9 So I took all of this to heart and concluded that the righteous and the wise, as well as their works, are in the hands of the true God. Men are not aware of the love and the hate that took place prior to them. 2 All have the very same outcome, the righteous and the wicked, the good and the clean and the unclean, those sacrificing and those not sacrificing. The good one is the same as the sinner; the one who swears an oath is the same as the one who is cautious about swearing an oath. 3 This is a distressing thing that happens under the sun: Because all have the same outcome, the heart of humans is also full of bad; and there is madness in their heart during their life, and then they die!4 There is hope for whoever is among the living, because a live dog is better off than a dead lion. 5 For the living know that they will die, but the dead know nothing at all, nor do they have any more reward, because all memory of them is forgotten. 6 Also, their love and their hate and their jealousy have already perished, and they no longer have any share in what is done under the sun.7 Go, eat your food with rejoicing, and drink your wine with a cheerful heart, for already the true God has found pleasure in your works. 8 May your clothing always be white, and do not fail to put oil on your head. 9 Enjoy life with your beloved wife all the days of your futile life, which He has given you under the sun, all the days of your futility, for that is your lot in life and in your hard work at which you toil under the sun. 10 Whatever your hand finds to do, do with all your might, for there is no work nor planning nor knowledge nor wisdom in the Grave, where you are going.11 I have seen something further under the sun, that the swift do not always win the race, nor do the mighty win the battle, nor do the wise always have the food, nor do the intelligent always have the riches, nor do those with knowledge always have success, because time and unexpected events overtake them all. 12 For man does not know his time. Just as fish are caught in an evil net and birds are caught in a trap, so the sons of men are ensnared in a time of disaster, when it suddenly overtakes them.13 I also observed this about wisdom under the sun—and it impressed me: 14 There was a small city with a few men in it; and a mighty king came against it and surrounded it and built great siegeworks against it. 15 In it was found a poor but wise man, and he saved the city by his wisdom. But no one remembered that poor man. 16 And I said to myself: ‘Wisdom is better than mightiness; yet a poor man’s wisdom is despised, and his words are not heeded.’17 Better to heed the calm words of the wise than the shouts of the one ruling among fools.18 Wisdom is better than weapons of war, but just one sinner can destroy much good.
1 The words of the congregator, the son of David, the king in Jerusalem. 2 “The greatest futility!” says the congregator,“The greatest futility! Everything is futile!” 3 What does a person gain from all his hard workAt which he toils under the sun? 4 A generation is going, and a generation is coming,But the earth remains forever. 5 The sun rises, and the sun sets;Then it hurries back to the place where it rises again. 6 The wind goes south and circles around to the north;Round and round it continuously circles; the wind keeps making its rounds. 7 All the streams flow into the sea, yet the sea is not full.To the place from which the streams flow, there they return so as to flow again. 8 All things are wearisome;No one can even speak of it.The eye is not satisfied at seeing;Nor is the ear filled from hearing. 9 What has been is what will be,And what has been done will be done again;There is nothing new under the sun.10 Is there anything of which one may say, “Look at this—it is new”?It already existed from long ago;It already existed before our time.11 No one remembers people of former times;Nor will anyone remember those who come later;Nor will they be remembered by those who come still later.12 I, the congregator, have been king over Israel in Jerusalem. 13 I set my heart to study and explore with wisdom everything that has been done under the heavens—the miserable occupation that God has given to the sons of men that keeps them occupied.14 I saw all the works that were done under the sun,And look! everything was futile, a chasing after the wind.15 What is crooked cannot be made straight,And what is lacking cannot possibly be counted.16 Then I said in my heart: “Look! I have acquired great wisdom, more than anyone who was before me in Jerusalem, and my heart gained a great deal of wisdom and knowledge.” 17 I applied my heart to knowing wisdom and to knowing madness and to knowing folly, and this too is a chasing after the wind.18 For an abundance of wisdom brings an abundance of frustration,So that whoever increases knowledge increases pain.
2 “I am but a saffron of the coastal plain,A lily of the valleys.” 2 “Like a lily among thornsIs my beloved among the daughters.” 3 “Like an apple tree among the trees of the forest,So is my dear one among the sons.I passionately desire to sit in his shade,And his fruit is sweet to my taste. 4 He brought me into the banquet house,And his banner over me was love. 5 Refresh me with raisin cakes;Sustain me with apples,For I am lovesick. 6 His left hand is under my head,And his right hand embraces me. 7 I put you under oath, O daughters of Jerusalem,By the gazelles and the does of the field:Do not try to awaken or arouse love in me until it feels inclined. 8 The sound of my dear one!Look! Here he comes,Climbing the mountains, leaping over the hills. 9 My dear one is like a gazelle, like a young stag.There he is, standing behind our wall,Gazing through the windows,Looking through the lattices.10 My dear one speaks, he says to me:‘Rise up, my beloved,My beautiful one, come away with me.11 Look! The winter has passed.The rains are over and gone.12 Blossoms have appeared in the land,The time of pruning has arrived,And the song of the turtledove is heard in our land.13 The fig tree ripens its early figs;The vines are in blossom and give off their fragrance.Rise up, my beloved, and come.My beautiful one, come away with me.14 O my dove, in the retreats of the crag,In the recesses of the cliff,Let me see you and hear your voice,For your voice is pleasant and your appearance is lovely.’”15 “Catch the foxes for us,The little foxes that ruin the vineyards,For our vineyards are in bloom.”16 “My dear one is mine and I am his.He is shepherding among the lilies.17 Until the day grows breezy and the shadows flee,Return quickly, O my dear one,Like the gazelle or the young stag upon the mountains of separation.
3 “Upon my bed during the nights,I sought the one I love.I sought him, but I did not find him. 2 I will arise and roam the city;In the streets and in the public squares,Let me seek the one I love.I sought him, but I did not find him. 3 The watchmen making their rounds in the city found me.‘Have you seen the one I love?’ 4 Scarcely had I passed by themWhen I found the one I love.I held on to him, I would not let him goUntil I brought him into my mother’s house,Into the interior room of her who conceived me. 5 I put you under oath, O daughters of Jerusalem,By the gazelles and the does of the field:Do not try to awaken or arouse love in me until it feels inclined.” 6 “What is this coming up from the wilderness like columns of smoke,Perfumed with myrrh and frankincense,With all the fragrant powders of a merchant?” 7 “Look! It is the couch belonging to Solʹo·mon.Sixty mighty men surround it,Of the mighty men of Israel, 8 All of them armed with a sword,All trained in warfare,Each with his sword at his sideTo guard against the terrors of the night.” 9 “It is the royal litter of King Solʹo·monThat he made for himself from the trees of Lebʹa·non.10 Its pillars he made of silver,Its supports of gold.Its seat is of purple wool;Its interior was lovingly decoratedBy the daughters of Jerusalem.”11 “Go out, O daughters of Zion,Gaze at King Solʹo·monWearing the wedding crown his mother made for himOn the day of his marriage,On the day of his heart’s rejoicing.”
4 “Look! You are beautiful, my beloved.Look! You are beautiful.Your eyes are those of doves behind your veil.Your hair is like a flock of goatsStreaming down the mountains of Gilʹe·ad. 2 Your teeth are like a flock of newly shorn sheepThat have come up from being washed,All of them bearing twins,And not one has lost her young. 3 Your lips are like a scarlet thread,And your speech is delightful.Like a segment of pomegranateAre your cheeks behind your veil. 4 Your neck is like the tower of David,Built with courses of stoneUpon which are hung a thousand shields,All the circular shields of the mighty men. 5 Your two breasts are like two fawns,The twins of a gazelle,That feed among the lilies.” 6 “Until the day grows breezy and the shadows flee,I will go my way to the mountain of myrrhAnd to the hill of frankincense.” 7 “You are altogether beautiful, my beloved,There is no blemish in you. 8 Come with me from Lebʹa·non, my bride,Come with me from Lebʹa·non.Descend from the peak of A·maʹnah,From the peak of Seʹnir, the peak of Herʹmon,From the lairs of lions, from the mountains of leopards. 9 You have captured my heart, my sister, my bride,You have captured my heart with one glance of your eyes,With one pendant of your necklace.10 How beautiful your expressions of affection are, my sister, my bride!Your expressions of affection are far better than wine,And the fragrance of your perfume than any spice!11 Your lips, my bride, drip with comb honey.Honey and milk are under your tongue,And the fragrance of your garments is like the fragrance of Lebʹa·non.12 My sister, my bride, is like a locked garden,A locked garden, a spring sealed shut.13 Your shoots are a paradise of pomegranatesWith the choicest fruits, with henna along with spikenard plants,14 Spikenard and saffron, cane and cinnamon,With all sorts of trees of frankincense, myrrh, and aloes,Along with all the finest perfumes.15 You are a garden spring, a well of fresh water,And flowing streams from Lebʹa·non.16 Awake, O north wind;Come in, O south wind.Breathe upon my garden.Let its fragrance spread.”“Let my dear one come into his gardenAnd eat its choicest fruits.”
5 “I have entered my garden,O my sister, my bride.I have picked my myrrh and my spice.I have eaten my honeycomb and my honey;I have drunk my wine and my milk.”“Eat, dear friends!Drink and become intoxicated with expressions of affection!” 2 “I am asleep, but my heart is awake.There is the sound of my dear one knocking!”“Open to me, O my sister, my beloved,My dove, my flawless one!For my head is wet with dew,The locks of my hair with the moisture of the night.” 3 “‘I have taken off my robe.Must I put it back on?I have washed my feet.Must I soil them again?’ 4 My dear one withdrew his hand from the hole of the door,And my feelings for him were stirred. 5 I got up to open to my dear one;My hands dripped with myrrh,And my fingers with liquid myrrh,Onto the handles of the lock. 6 I opened to my dear one,But my dear one had turned away, he had gone.I felt despair when he departed.I sought him, but I did not find him.I called him, but he did not answer me. 7 The watchmen making their rounds in the city found me.They struck me, they wounded me.The watchmen of the walls took my shawl away from me. 8 I put you under oath, O daughters of Jerusalem:If you find my dear one,Tell him that I am lovesick.” 9 “How is your dear one better than any other dear one,You most beautiful of women?How is your dear one better than any other dear one,That you put us under such an oath?”10 “My dear one is dazzling and ruddy;He stands out among ten thousand.11 His head is gold, the finest gold.The locks of his hair are like waving palm fronds,As black as the raven.12 His eyes are like doves by streams of water,Bathing themselves in milk,Sitting by a brimming pool.13 His cheeks are like a bed of spices,Mounds of scented herbs.His lips are lilies, dripping with liquid myrrh.14 His hands are cylinders of gold, set with chrysʹo·lite.His abdomen is polished ivory covered with sapphires.15 His legs are pillars of marble set on pedestals of the finest gold.His appearance is like Lebʹa·non, as unrivaled as the cedars.16 His mouth is sweetness itself,And everything about him is desirable.This is my dear one, this is my beloved, O daughters of Jerusalem.”
6 “Where has your dear one gone,O most beautiful of women?Which way did your dear one turn?Let us seek him with you.” 2 “My dear one has gone down to his garden,To the beds of spice plants,To shepherd among the gardensAnd to pick lilies. 3 I am my dear one’s,And my dear one is mine.He is shepherding among the lilies.” 4 “You are as beautiful as Tirʹzah, my beloved,As lovely as Jerusalem,As breathtaking as armies around their banners. 5 Turn your eyes away from me,For they overwhelm me.Your hair is like a flock of goatsStreaming down the slopes of Gilʹe·ad. 6 Your teeth are like a flock of sheepThat have come up from being washed,All of them bearing twins,And not one has lost her young. 7 Like a segment of pomegranateAre your cheeks behind your veil. 8 There may be 60 queensAnd 80 concubinesAnd young women without number. 9 But only one is my dove, my flawless one.The only one of her mother.She is the favorite of the one who bore her.The daughters see her, and they pronounce her happy;Queens and concubines, and they praise her.10 ‘Who is she who shines like the dawn,As beautiful as the full moon,As pure as the sunlight,As breathtaking as armies around their banners?’”11 “I went down to the garden of nut treesTo see the new growth in the valley,To see whether the vine had sprouted,Whether the pomegranate trees had blossomed.12 Before I knew it,My desire had put meAt the chariots of my noble people.”13 “Return, return, O Shuʹlam·mite!Return, return,That we may look upon you!”“Why do you gaze upon the Shuʹlam·mite?”“She is like the dance of two companies!”
7 “How beautiful your feet are in your sandals,O noble daughter!The curves of your thighs are like ornaments,The work of an artisan’s hands. 2 Your navel is a round bowl.May it never lack mixed wine.Your belly is a heap of wheat,Encircled by lilies. 3 Your two breasts are like two fawns,The twins of a gazelle. 4 Your neck is like an ivory tower.Your eyes are like the pools in Heshʹbon,By the gate of Bath-rabʹbim.Your nose is like the tower of Lebʹa·non,Which looks toward Damascus. 5 Your head crowns you like Carʹmel,And the locks of your hair are like purple wool.The king is captivated by the flowing tresses. 6 How beautiful you are, and how pleasant you are,O beloved girl, above all exquisite delights! 7 Your stature is like a palm tree,And your breasts are like date clusters. 8 I said, ‘I will climb the palm treeTo take hold of its stalks of fruit.’May your breasts be like clusters of grapes,Your breath as fragrant as apples, 9 And your mouth like the best wine.”“May it go down smoothly for my dear one,Softly flowing over the lips of those asleep.10 I am my dear one’s,And his desire is for me.11 Come, O my dear one,Let us go out to the fields;Let us lodge among the henna plants.12 Let us rise early and go to the vineyardsTo see if the vine has sprouted,If the blossoms have opened,If the pomegranates are in bloom.There I will express my affection for you.13 The mandrakes give off their fragrance;At our doors are all sorts of choice fruits.The new as well as the old,O my dear one, I have kept in store for you.
8 “If only you were like my brother,Who nursed at my mother’s breasts!Then if I found you outside, I would kiss you,And no one would despise me. 2 I would lead you;I would bring you into the house of my mother,She who taught me.I would give you spiced wine to drink,The fresh juice of pomegranates. 3 His left hand would be under my head,And his right hand would embrace me. 4 I put you under oath, O daughters of Jerusalem:Do not try to awaken or arouse love in me until it feels inclined.” 5 “Who is this coming up from the wilderness,Leaning upon her dear one?”“Under the apple tree I awakened you.There your mother was in labor with you.There she who gave birth to you was in labor. 6 Place me as a seal upon your heart,As a seal upon your arm,For love is as strong as death is,And exclusive devotion is as unyielding as the Grave.Its flames are a blazing fire, the flame of Jah. 7 Surging waters cannot extinguish love,Nor can rivers wash it away.If a man would offer all the wealth of his house for love,It would be utterly despised.” 8 “We have a little sister,And she has no breasts.What will we do for our sisterOn the day when she is spoken for?” 9 “If she is a wall,We will build upon her a battlement of silver,But if she is a door,We will board her up with a cedar plank.”10 “I am a wall,And my breasts are like towers.So in his eyes I have becomeAs one who finds peace.11 Solʹo·mon had a vineyard in Baʹal-haʹmon.He entrusted the vineyard to caretakers.Each one would bring in a thousand pieces of silver for its fruit.12 I have my own vineyard at my disposal.The thousand pieces of silver belong to you, O Solʹo·mon,And two hundred to those who care for its fruit.”13 “O you who are dwelling in the gardens,The companions listen for your voice.Let me hear it.”14 “Hurry, my dear one,And be swift like a gazelleOr a young stagUpon the mountains of spices.”
1 The song of songs, which is Solʹo·mon’s: 2 “May he kiss me with the kisses of his mouth,For your expressions of affection are better than wine. 3 The fragrance of your oils is pleasant.Your name is like a fragrant oil poured out.That is why the young women love you. 4 Take me with you; let us run.The king has brought me into his interior rooms!Let us be joyful and rejoice in you.Let us praise your expressions of affection more than wine.Rightly they love you. 5 I am dark, but lovely, O daughters of Jerusalem,Like the tents of Keʹdar, like the tent cloths of Solʹo·mon. 6 Do not stare at me because I am swarthy,Because the sun has gazed upon me.The sons of my mother were angry with me;They appointed me the keeper of the vineyards,But my own vineyard I did not keep. 7 Tell me, you whom I love so much,Where you pasture your flock,Where you have them lie down at midday.Why should I be like a woman wrapped in a veilAmong the flocks of your companions?” 8 “If you do not know, O most beautiful of women,Go follow the tracks of the flockAnd pasture your young goats next to the tents of the shepherds.” 9 “I liken you, my beloved, to a mare among the chariots of Pharʹaoh.10 Your cheeks are lovely with ornaments,Your neck with strings of beads.11 We will make for you gold ornamentsStudded with silver.”12 “While the king sits at his round table,My perfume gives off its fragrance.13 My dear one is to me like a fragrant bag of myrrhSpending the night between my breasts.14 My dear one is to me like a cluster of hennaAmong the vineyards of En-gedʹi.”15 “Look! You are beautiful, my beloved.Look! You are beautiful. Your eyes are those of doves.”16 “Look! You are beautiful, my dear one, and delightful.Our bed is among the foliage.17 The beams of our house are cedars,Our rafters are juniper trees.
10 Woe to those who enact harmful regulations,Who constantly draft oppressive decrees, 2 To deny the legal claim of the poor,To deprive the lowly among my people of justice,Making widows their spoilAnd fatherless children their plunder! 3 What will you do on the day of reckoning,When destruction comes from afar?To whom will you flee for assistance,And where will you leave your wealth? 4 Nothing remains except to crouch among the prisonersOr to fall among the slain.In view of all this, his anger has not turned back,But his hand is still stretched out to strike. 5 “Aha! the As·syrʹi·an,The rod to express my angerAnd the staff in their hand for my denunciation! 6 I will send him against an apostate nation,Against the people who infuriated me;I will command him to take much spoil and much plunderAnd to trample them like mud in the streets. 7 But he will not be inclined this wayAnd his heart will not scheme this way;For it is in his heart to annihilate,To cut off many nations, not a few. 8 For he says,‘Are not my princes all kings? 9 Is not Calʹno just like Carʹche·mish?Is not Haʹmath like Arʹpad?Is not Sa·marʹi·a like Damascus?10 My hand has seized the kingdoms of the worthless gods,Whose graven images were more than those of Jerusalem and Sa·marʹi·a!11 Will I not also do to Jerusalem and her idolsJust as I have done to Sa·marʹi·a and to her worthless gods?’12 “When Jehovah finishes all his work on Mount Zion and in Jerusalem, He will punish the king of As·syrʹi·a for his insolent heart and his proud, arrogant gaze. 13 For he says,‘I will do this by the strength of my handAnd with my wisdom, for I am wise.I will remove the boundaries of peoplesAnd pillage their treasures,And I will subdue the inhabitants like a mighty one.14 Like a man reaching into a nest,My hand will seize the resources of the peoples;And like one gathering abandoned eggs,I will gather the whole earth!No one will flutter his wings or open his mouth or chirp.’”15 Will the ax exalt itself over the one who chops with it?Will the saw exalt itself over the one who saws with it?Could a staff wave the one who lifts it?Or could a rod lift up the one who is not made of wood?16 Therefore the true Lord, Jehovah of armies,Will inflict emaciation on his fat ones,And beneath his glory he will kindle a blazing fire.17 Israel’s Light will become a fire,And his Holy One a flame;It will blaze up and consume his weeds and his thornbushes in one day.18 He will utterly do away with the glory of his forest and his orchard;It will be as when a sick man wastes away.19 The rest of the trees of his forestWill be so few that a boy could list them.20 In that day those remaining of IsraelAnd the survivors of the house of JacobWill no longer support themselves on the one who struck them;But they will support themselves on Jehovah,The Holy One of Israel, with faithfulness.21 Only a remnant will return,The remnant of Jacob, to the Mighty God.22 For though your people, O Israel,Are as the grains of sand of the sea,Only a remnant of them will return.An extermination has been decided on,And justice will engulf them.23 Yes, the extermination decided on by the Sovereign Lord, Jehovah of armies,Will be carried out in the entire land.24 Therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord, Jehovah of armies, says: “Do not be afraid, my people who are dwelling in Zion, because of the As·syrʹi·an, who used to strike you with the rod and to lift up his staff against you as Egypt did. 25 For in a very little while the denunciation will come to an end; my anger will be directed to their destruction. 26 Jehovah of armies will brandish a whip against him, as when he defeated Midʹi·an by the rock Oʹreb. And his staff will be over the sea, and he will raise it as he did with Egypt.27 In that day his load will depart from on your shoulder,And his yoke from on your neck,And the yoke will be broken because of the oil.”28 He has come to Aiʹath;He has passed through Migʹron;At Michʹmash he deposits his baggage.29 They have passed over the ford;They spend the night at Geʹba;Raʹmah trembles, Gibʹe·ah of Saul has fled.30 Cry out and scream, O daughter of Galʹlim!Pay attention, O Laʹi·shah!O poor Anʹa·thoth!31 Mad·meʹnah has run away.The inhabitants of Geʹbim have sought shelter.32 This very day he will halt in Nob.He shakes his fist at the mountain of the daughter of Zion,The hill of Jerusalem.33 Look! The true Lord, Jehovah of armies,Is chopping off branches with a terrible crash;The tallest trees are being cut down,And the lofty are brought low.34 He strikes down the thickets of the forest with an iron tool,And Lebʹa·non will fall by a mighty one.
11 A twig will grow out of the stump of Jesʹse,And a sprout from his roots will bear fruit. 2 And the spirit of Jehovah will settle upon him,The spirit of wisdom and of understanding,The spirit of counsel and of mightiness,The spirit of knowledge and of the fear of Jehovah. 3 And he will find delight in the fear of Jehovah.He will not judge by what appears to his eyes,Nor reprove simply according to what his ears hear. 4 He will judge the lowly with fairness,And with uprightness he will give reproof in behalf of the meek ones of the earth.He will strike the earth with the rod of his mouthAnd put the wicked to death with the breath of his lips. 5 Righteousness will be the belt around his waist,And faithfulness the belt of his hips. 6 The wolf will reside for a while with the lamb,And with the young goat the leopard will lie down,And the calf and the lion and the fattened animal will all be together;And a little boy will lead them. 7 The cow and the bear will feed together,And their young will lie down together.The lion will eat straw like the bull. 8 The nursing child will play over the lair of a cobra,And a weaned child will put his hand over the den of a poisonous snake. 9 They will not cause any harmOr any ruin in all my holy mountain,Because the earth will certainly be filled with the knowledge of JehovahAs the waters cover the sea.10 In that day the root of Jesʹse will stand up as a signal for the peoples.To him the nations will turn for guidance,And his resting-place will become glorious.11 In that day Jehovah will again offer his hand, a second time, to reclaim the remnant of his people who are left from As·syrʹi·a, from Egypt, from Pathʹros, from Cush, from Eʹlam, from Shiʹnar, from Haʹmath, and from the islands of the sea. 12 He will raise up a signal for the nations and gather the dispersed ones of Israel, and he will gather together the scattered ones of Judah from the four corners of the earth.13 The jealousy of Eʹphra·im will be gone,And those who show hostility to Judah will be done away with.Eʹphra·im will not be jealous of Judah,Nor will Judah show hostility toward Eʹphra·im.14 And they will swoop down on the slopes of the Phi·lisʹtines to the west;Together they will plunder the people of the East.They will thrust out their hand against Eʹdom and Moʹab,And the Amʹmon·ites will become their subjects.15 Jehovah will divide the gulf of the Egyptian seaAnd wave his hand over the River.With his scorching breath he will strike it in its seven torrents,And he will cause people to walk across in their sandals.16 And there will be a highway out of As·syrʹi·a for the remnant of his people who are left,As there was for Israel in the day he came out of the land of Egypt.
12 In that day you will certainly say:“I thank you, O Jehovah,For although you were angry with me,Your anger gradually subsided, and you comforted me. 2 Look! God is my salvation.I will trust and feel no dread;For Jah Jehovah is my strength and my might,And he has become my salvation.” 3 With rejoicing you will draw waterFrom the springs of salvation. 4 And in that day you will say:“Give thanks to Jehovah, call on his name,Make his deeds known among the peoples!Declare that his name is exalted. 5 Sing praises to Jehovah, for he has done magnificent things.Let this be made known in all the earth. 6 Cry out and shout for joy, you inhabitant of Zion,For great in your midst is the Holy One of Israel.”
13 A pronouncement against Babylon that Isaiah the son of Aʹmoz saw in vision: 2 “Raise up a signal on a mountain of bare rocks.Call out to them, wave your hand,So that they may come into the entrances of the nobles. 3 I have issued the command to those whom I have appointed.I have summoned my warriors to express my anger,My proudly exultant ones. 4 Listen! A crowd in the mountains;It sounds like a numerous people!Listen! The uproar of kingdoms,Of nations gathered together!Jehovah of armies is mustering the army for war. 5 They are coming from a distant land,From the extremity of the heavens,Jehovah and the weapons of his wrath,To bring ruin to all the earth. 6 Wail, for the day of Jehovah is near!It will come as a destruction from the Almighty. 7 That is why all hands will go limp,And every man’s heart will melt with fear. 8 The people are panic-stricken.They are seized with convulsions and pain,Like a woman in labor.They look at one another in horror,With faces inflamed by anguish. 9 Look! The day of Jehovah is coming,Cruel both with fury and with burning anger,To make the land an object of horror,And to annihilate the land’s sinners from it.10 For the stars of the heavens and their constellationsWill not give off their light;The sun will be dark when it rises,And the moon will not shed its light.11 I will call the inhabited earth to account for its badness,And the wicked for their error.I will put an end to the pride of the presumptuous,And I will humble the haughtiness of tyrants.12 I will make mortal man scarcer than refined gold,And humans scarcer than the gold of Oʹphir.13 That is why I will make the heavens tremble,And the earth will be shaken out of its placeAt the fury of Jehovah of armies in the day of his burning anger.14 Like a hunted gazelle and like a flock with no one to gather them,Each will return to his own people;Each will flee to his own land.15 Whoever is found will be pierced through,And whoever is caught will fall by the sword.16 Their children will be dashed to pieces before their eyes,Their houses will be looted,And their wives will be raped.17 Here I am raising up against them the Medes,Who regard silver as nothingAnd who take no delight in gold.18 Their bows will shatter young men;They will show no pity on the fruit of the wombNor mercy to children.19 And Babylon, the most glorious of kingdoms,The beauty and the pride of the Chal·deʹans,Will be like Sodʹom and Go·morʹrah when God overthrew them.20 She will never be inhabited,Nor will she be a place to reside in throughout all generations.No Arab will pitch his tent there,And no shepherds will rest their flocks there.21 The desert creatures will lie down there;Their houses will be filled with eagle owls.The ostriches will reside there,And wild goats will skip about there.22 Howling creatures will cry out in her towers,And jackals in her luxurious palaces.Her time is near, and her days will not be prolonged.”
14 For Jehovah will show mercy to Jacob, and he will again choose Israel. He will settle them in their land, and the foreign residents will join them and attach themselves to the house of Jacob. 2 And peoples will take them and bring them to their own place, and the house of Israel will possess them as male and female servants in Jehovah’s land; and they will be the captors of those who held them captive, and they will have in subjection those who were forcing them to work.3 In the day when Jehovah gives you rest from your pain and from your turmoil and from the hard slavery imposed on you, 4 you will recite this proverb against the king of Babylon:“How the one forcing others to work has met his end!How the oppression has ended! 5 Jehovah has broken the rod of the wicked,The staff of the rulers, 6 The one furiously striking peoples with unceasing blows,The one angrily subduing nations with relentless persecution. 7 The whole earth now rests, free of disturbance.People cry out for joy. 8 Even the juniper trees rejoice over you,Along with the cedars of Lebʹa·non.They say, ‘Ever since you have fallen,No woodcutter comes up against us.’ 9 Even the Grave underneath is stirred upTo meet you when you come.Because of you, it awakens those powerless in death,All the oppressive leaders of the earth.It makes all the kings of the nations rise from their thrones.10 All of them speak up and say to you,‘Have you also become weak like us?Have you become like us?11 Down to the Grave your pride has been brought,The sound of your stringed instruments.Maggots are spread beneath you as a bed,And worms are your covering.’12 How you have fallen from heaven,O shining one, son of the dawn!How you have been cut down to the earth,You who vanquished nations!13 You said in your heart, ‘I will ascend to the heavens.Above the stars of God I will lift up my throne,And I will sit down on the mountain of meeting,In the remotest parts of the north.14 I will go up above the tops of the clouds;I will make myself resemble the Most High.’15 Instead, you will be brought down to the Grave,To the remotest parts of the pit.16 Those seeing you will stare at you;They will closely examine you, saying,‘Is this the man who was shaking the earth,Who made kingdoms tremble,17 Who made the inhabited earth like the wildernessAnd overthrew its cities,Who refused to let his prisoners go home?’18 All other kings of the nations,Yes, all of them, lie down in glory,Each one in his own tomb.19 But you are discarded without a grave,Like a detested sprout,Clothed with the slain who were stabbed with the sword,Who go down to the stones of a pit,Like a carcass trampled underfoot.20 You will not join them in a grave,For you destroyed your own land,You killed your own people.The offspring of evildoers will never again be named.21 Prepare a slaughtering block for his sonsBecause of the guilt of their forefathers,So that they will not rise up and take over the earthAnd fill the land with their cities.”22 “I will rise up against them,” declares Jehovah of armies.“And I will wipe out from Babylon name and remnant and descendants and posterity,” declares Jehovah.23 “And I will make her a possession of porcupines and a region of marshes, and I will sweep her with the broom of annihilation,” declares Jehovah of armies.24 Jehovah of armies has sworn:“Just as I have intended, so it will occur,And just as I have decided, that is what will come true.25 I will crush the As·syrʹi·an in my land,And I will trample him on my mountains.His yoke will be removed from them,And his load will be removed from their shoulder.”26 This is what has been decided against all the earth,And this is the hand that is stretched out against all the nations.27 For Jehovah of armies has decided,And who can thwart it?His hand is stretched out,And who can turn it back?28 In the year that King Aʹhaz died, this pronouncement was made:29 “Do not rejoice, Phi·lisʹti·a, any of you,Just because the staff of the one striking you has been broken.For from the root of the serpent will come a poisonous snake,And its offspring will be a flying fiery snake.30 While the firstborn of the lowly feedAnd the poor lie down in security,I will put your root to death with famine,And what is left of you will be killed.31 Wail, O gate! Cry out, O city!All of you will lose heart, O Phi·lisʹti·a!For a smoke is coming from the north,And there are no stragglers in his ranks.”32 How should they answer the messengers of the nation?That Jehovah has laid the foundation of Zion,And that the lowly ones of his people will take refuge in her.
15 A pronouncement against Moʹab:Because it has been devastated in a night,Ar of Moʹab has been silenced.Because it has been devastated in a night,Kir of Moʹab has been silenced. 2 He has gone up to the House and to Diʹbon,To the high places to weep.Moʹab wails over Neʹbo and over Medʹe·ba.Every head is shaved bald, every beard is clipped. 3 In its streets they have put on sackcloth.On their roofs and in their public squares they all wail;They go down weeping. 4 Heshʹbon and E·le·aʹleh cry out;Their voice is heard as far as Jaʹhaz.That is why the armed men of Moʹab keep shouting.He is trembling. 5 My heart cries out over Moʹab.Its fugitives have fled as far as Zoʹar and Egʹlath-she·liʹshi·yah.On the ascent of Luʹhith they weep as they go up;On the way to Hor·o·naʹim they cry out over the catastrophe. 6 For the waters of Nimʹrim are desolate;The green grass has dried up,The grass is gone and nothing green is left. 7 That is why they are carrying away what is left of their stores and their riches;They are crossing the valley of poplars. 8 For the outcry echoes throughout the territory of Moʹab.The wailing reaches to Eg·laʹim;The wailing reaches to Beʹer-eʹlim. 9 For the waters of Diʹmon are full of blood,And I have more in store for Diʹmon:A lion for those of Moʹab who escapeAnd for those remaining in the land.
16 Send a ram to the ruler of the land,From Seʹla through the wildernessTo the mountain of the daughter of Zion. 2 Like a bird chased away from its nest,So the daughters of Moʹab will be at the fords of Arʹnon. 3 “Offer counsel, carry out the decision.Make your shadow at high noon like the night.Conceal the dispersed and do not betray those fleeing. 4 May my dispersed ones reside in you, O Moʹab.Become a place of concealment to them because of the destroyer.The oppressor will reach his end,The destruction will come to an end,And those trampling others down will perish from the earth. 5 Then a throne will be firmly established in loyal love.The one who sits on it in the tent of David will be faithful;He will judge fairly and will swiftly execute righteousness.” 6 We have heard about the pride of Moʹab—he is very proud—His haughtiness and his pride and his fury;But his empty talk will come to nothing. 7 So Moʹab will wail for Moʹab;They will all wail.Those who are stricken will moan for the raisin cakes of Kir-harʹe·seth. 8 For the terraces of Heshʹbon have withered,The vine of Sibʹmah,The rulers of the nations have trampled its bright-red branches;They had reached as far as Jaʹzer;They had extended into the wilderness.Its shoots had spread out and gone as far as the sea. 9 That is why I will weep over the vine of Sibʹmah as I weep for Jaʹzer.With my tears I will drench you, O Heshʹbon and E·le·aʹleh,Because the shouting over your summer fruit and your harvest has ended.10 Rejoicing and joyfulness have been taken away from the orchard,And there are no songs of joy or shouting in the vineyards.The treader no longer treads out wine in the presses,For I have caused the shouting to cease.11 That is why deep within me I am boisterous over Moʹab,Like the strumming of a harp,And my innermost being over Kir-harʹe·seth.12 Even when Moʹab wears himself out on the high place and goes to pray in his sanctuary, he will accomplish nothing.13 This is the word that Jehovah previously spoke concerning Moʹab. 14 And now Jehovah says: “Within three years, like the years of a hired worker, the glory of Moʹab will be disgraced with much tumult of every sort, and those who remain will be very few and insignificant.”
17 A pronouncement against Damascus:“Look! Damascus will cease to be a city,And it will become a heap of ruins. 2 The cities of A·roʹer will be abandoned;They will become places for flocks to lie downWith no one to make them afraid. 3 Fortified cities will disappear from Eʹphra·im,And the kingdom from Damascus;And those remaining of SyriaWill be like the glory of the Israelites,” declares Jehovah of armies. 4 “In that day the glory of Jacob will diminish,And his healthy body will grow thin. 5 It will be as when the harvester is gathering the standing grainAnd his arm harvests the ears of grain,Like when one gleans grain in the Valley of Rephʹa·im. 6 Only gleanings will be left,As when an olive tree is beaten:Only two or three ripe olives remain on the highest branch,Only four or five on its fruit-bearing branches,” declares Jehovah the God of Israel.7 In that day man will look up to his Maker, and his eyes will gaze at the Holy One of Israel. 8 He will not look to the altars, the work of his hands; and he will not gaze at what his fingers have made, either the sacred poles or the incense stands. 9 In that day his fortress cities will become like an abandoned site in the woodland,Like a branch that was abandoned before the Israelites;It will become a wasteland.10 For you have forgotten the God of your salvation;You have failed to remember the Rock of your fortress.That is why you plant beautiful plantationsAnd set it with the shoot of a stranger.11 In the day you carefully fence in your plantation,In the morning you make your seed sprout,But the harvest will vanish in the day of disease and incurable pain.12 Listen! There is a commotion of many peoples,Who are as boisterous as the seas!There is an uproar of nations,Whose sound is like the roar of mighty waters!13 The nations will make a sound like the roar of many waters.He will rebuke them, and they will flee far away,Chased like the chaff of the mountains before a wind,Like a whirling thistle before a storm wind.14 In the evening there is terror.Before morning they are no more.This is the share of those pillaging usAnd the lot of those plundering us.
18 Woe to the land of whirring insect wingsIn the region of the rivers of E·thi·oʹpi·a! 2 It sends envoys by sea,Across the waters in papyrus vessels, saying:“Go, you swift messengers,To a tall and smooth-skinned nation,To a people feared everywhere,To a strong, conquering nation,Whose land is washed away by rivers.” 3 All you inhabitants of the land and you residents of the earth,What you see will be like a signal raised on the mountains,And you will hear a sound like the blowing of a horn. 4 For this is what Jehovah said to me:“I will remain undisturbed and look on my established place,Like the shimmering heat along with the sunlight,Like the cloud of dew in the heat of harvest. 5 For before the harvest,When the blossom is finished and the bloom becomes a ripening grape,The shoots will be cut off with pruning shearsAnd the tendrils will be lopped off and removed. 6 They will all be left for the birds of prey of the mountainsAnd for the beasts of the earth.The birds of prey will spend the summer on them,And all the beasts of the earth will spend the harvesttime on them. 7 At that time a gift will be brought to Jehovah of armies,From a tall and smooth-skinned nation,From a people feared everywhere,From a strong, conquering nation,Whose land is washed away by riversTo the place that bears the name of Jehovah of armies, Mount Zion.”
19 A pronouncement against Egypt:Look! Jehovah is riding on a swift cloud and is coming into Egypt.The worthless gods of Egypt will tremble before him,And the heart of Egypt will melt within it. 2 “I will incite Egyptians against Egyptians,And they will fight one another,Each against his brother and his neighbor,City against city, kingdom against kingdom. 3 And the spirit of Egypt will become bewildered within it,And I will confuse its plans.They will resort to the worthless gods,To the charmers and to the spirit mediums and to the fortune-tellers. 4 I will hand Egypt over to a hard master,And a harsh king will rule over them,” declares the true Lord, Jehovah of armies. 5 The water of the sea will be dried up,And the river will become parched and run dry. 6 And the rivers will stink;The Nile canals of Egypt will become low and parched.The reeds and the rushes will decay. 7 The plants along the Nile River, at the mouth of the Nile,And all the land sown with seed along the Nile will dry up.It will be blown away, and it will be no more. 8 And the fishermen will mourn,Those casting fishhooks into the Nile will lament,And those who spread their nets on the water will dwindle. 9 Those who work in combed flaxAnd those making white fabric on the loom will be put to shame.10 Her weavers will be crushed;All the hired workers will grieve.11 The princes of Zoʹan are foolish.The wisest advisers of Pharʹaoh give unreasonable advice.How can you say to Pharʹaoh:“I am a descendant of wise ones,A descendant of ancient kings”?12 Where, then, are your wise men?Let them tell you if they know what Jehovah of armies has decided concerning Egypt.13 The princes of Zoʹan have acted foolishly;The princes of Noph have been deceived;The chiefs of her tribes have led Egypt astray.14 Jehovah has poured out on her a spirit of confusion;And they have led Egypt astray in whatever she does,Like a drunk staggering in his vomit.15 And Egypt will not have any work to do,Whether for the head or the tail, the shoot or the rush.16 In that day Egypt will become like women, trembling and terrified because of the threatening hand that Jehovah of armies raises against it. 17 And the land of Judah will become a cause for terror to Egypt. They will feel dread at the mention of it because of the decision that Jehovah of armies has made against them.18 In that day there will be five cities in the land of Egypt speaking the language of Caʹnaan and swearing loyalty to Jehovah of armies. One city will be called The City of Tearing Down.19 In that day there will be an altar to Jehovah in the middle of the land of Egypt and a pillar to Jehovah at its boundary. 20 It will be for a sign and for a witness to Jehovah of armies in the land of Egypt; for they will cry out to Jehovah because of the oppressors, and he will send them a savior, a grand one, who will save them. 21 And Jehovah will become known to the Egyptians, and the Egyptians will know Jehovah in that day, and they will offer sacrifices and gifts and make a vow to Jehovah and pay it. 22 Jehovah will strike Egypt, striking and healing it; and they will return to Jehovah, and he will respond to their entreaties and heal them.23 In that day there will be a highway out of Egypt to As·syrʹi·a. Then As·syrʹi·a will come into Egypt, and Egypt into As·syrʹi·a, and Egypt will serve God together with As·syrʹi·a. 24 In that day Israel will be the third along with Egypt and with As·syrʹi·a, a blessing in the midst of the earth, 25 for Jehovah of armies will have blessed it, saying: “Blessed be my people, Egypt, and the work of my hands, As·syrʹi·a, and my inheritance, Israel.”
2 This is what Isaiah the son of Aʹmoz saw concerning Judah and Jerusalem: 2 In the final part of the days,The mountain of the house of JehovahWill become firmly established above the top of the mountains,And it will be raised up above the hills,And to it all the nations will stream. 3 And many peoples will go and say:“Come, let us go up to the mountain of Jehovah,To the house of the God of Jacob.He will instruct us about his ways,And we will walk in his paths.”For law will go out of Zion,And the word of Jehovah out of Jerusalem. 4 He will render judgment among the nationsAnd set matters straight respecting many peoples.They will beat their swords into plowsharesAnd their spears into pruning shears.Nation will not lift up sword against nation,Nor will they learn war anymore. 5 O house of Jacob, come,Let us walk in the light of Jehovah. 6 For you have forsaken your people, the house of Jacob,Because they have become full of things from the East;They practice magic like the Phi·lisʹtines,And they abound with the children of foreigners. 7 Their land is filled with silver and gold,And there is no limit to their treasures.Their land is filled with horses,And there is no limit to their chariots. 8 Their land is filled with worthless gods.They bow down to the work of their own hands,To what their own fingers have made. 9 So man bows down, he becomes low,And you cannot possibly pardon them.10 Enter into the rock and hide yourself in the dustBecause of the terrifying presence of JehovahAnd his majestic splendor.11 The haughty eyes of man will be brought low,And the arrogance of men will bow down.Jehovah alone will be exalted in that day.12 For it is the day belonging to Jehovah of armies.It is coming upon everyone who is haughty and lofty,Upon everyone, whether exalted or lowly,13 Upon all the cedars of Lebʹa·non that are lofty and exaltedAnd upon all the oaks of Baʹshan,14 Upon all the lofty mountainsAnd upon all the high hills,15 Upon every high tower and every fortified wall,16 Upon all the ships of TarʹshishAnd upon all desirable boats.17 Man’s haughtiness will be brought down,And the arrogance of men will bow low.Jehovah alone will be exalted in that day.18 The worthless gods will completely disappear.19 And people will enter into the caves of the rocksAnd into the holes in the ground,Because of the terrifying presence of JehovahAnd his majestic splendor,When he arises to make the earth tremble in terror.20 In that day men will take their worthless gods of silver and of goldThat they had made for themselves to bow down toAnd throw them away to the shrewmice and to the bats,21 In order to enter into the holes in the rocksAnd into the clefts of the crags,Because of the terrifying presence of JehovahAnd his majestic splendor,When he arises to make the earth tremble in terror.22 For your own sakes, quit trusting in mere man,Who is only the breath in his nostrils.Why should he be taken into account?
20 In the year that King Sarʹgon of As·syrʹi·a sent the Tarʹtan to Ashʹdod, he fought against Ashʹdod and captured it. 2 At that time Jehovah spoke through Isaiah the son of Aʹmoz, saying: “Go, remove the sackcloth from your hips, and take your sandals off your feet.” And he did so, walking about naked and barefoot.3 Jehovah then said: “Just as my servant Isaiah has walked about naked and barefoot for three years as a sign and a portent against Egypt and E·thi·oʹpi·a, 4 so the king of As·syrʹi·a will lead the captives of Egypt and the exiles of E·thi·oʹpi·a, boys and old men, naked and barefoot and with exposed buttocks, the nakedness of Egypt. 5 And they will be terrified and will be ashamed of E·thi·oʹpi·a their hope and of Egypt their pride. 6 The inhabitants of this coastland will say in that day, ‘Look at what happened to our hope, to which we fled for help and rescue from the king of As·syrʹi·a! How will we escape now?’”
21 A pronouncement against the wilderness of the sea:It is coming like storm winds that sweep through in the south,From the wilderness, from a fearsome land. 2 A harsh vision has been told to me:The treacherous one is acting treacherously,And the destroyer is destroying.Go up, O Eʹlam! Lay siege, O Meʹdi·a!I will put an end to all the sighing she caused. 3 That is why I am in great anguish.Convulsions have seized me,Like those of a woman giving birth.I am too distressed to hear;I am too disturbed to see. 4 My heart falters; I shudder in terror.The twilight I longed for makes me tremble. 5 Set the table and arrange the seats!Eat and drink!Get up, you princes, anoint the shield! 6 For this is what Jehovah said to me:“Go, post a lookout and have him report what he sees.” 7 And he saw a war chariot with a team of horses,A war chariot of donkeys,A war chariot of camels.He watched carefully, with great attentiveness. 8 Then he called out like a lion:“Upon the watchtower, O Jehovah, I am standing constantly by day,And I am stationed at my guardpost every night. 9 Look at what is coming:Men in a war chariot with a team of horses!”Then he spoke up and said:“She has fallen! Babylon has fallen!All the graven images of her gods he has shattered to the ground!”10 O my people who have been threshed,The product of my threshing floor,I have reported to you what I have heard from Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel.11 A pronouncement against Duʹmah:Someone is calling out to me from Seʹir:“Watchman, what of the night?Watchman, what of the night?”12 The watchman said:“The morning is coming, and also the night.If you would inquire, inquire.Come again!”13 A pronouncement against the desert plain:In the forest in the desert plain you will spend the night,O caravans of Deʹdan.14 Bring water to meet the thirsty one,You inhabitants of the land of Teʹma,And bring bread for the one fleeing.15 For they have fled from the swords, from the drawn sword,From the bent bow, and from the cruelty of the war.16 For this is what Jehovah said to me: “Within one year, like the years of a hired worker, all the glory of Keʹdar will come to an end. 17 The remaining bowmen of the warriors of Keʹdar will be few, for Jehovah the God of Israel has spoken.”
22 A pronouncement about the Valley of Vision:What is the matter with you that you have all gone up to the roofs? 2 You were full of turmoil,A boisterous city, an exultant town.Your slain were not slain with the sword,Nor did they die in battle. 3 All your dictators have fled together.They were taken prisoner without need of a bow.All who were found were taken prisoner,Even though they had fled far away. 4 That is why I said: “Turn your eyes away from me,And I will weep bitterly.Do not insist on comforting meOver the destruction of the daughter of my people. 5 For it is a day of confusion and of defeat and of panic,From the Sovereign Lord, Jehovah of armies,In the Valley of Vision.There is a demolishing of the wallAnd a cry to the mountain. 6 Eʹlam picks up the quiverWith manned chariots and horses,And Kir uncovers the shield. 7 Your choicest valleysWill become full of war chariots,And the horses will take their positions at the gate, 8 And the screen of Judah will be removed.“In that day you will look toward the armory of the House of the Forest, 9 and you will see the many breaches of the City of David. And you will collect the waters of the lower pool. 10 You will count the houses of Jerusalem, and you will pull down the houses to reinforce the wall. 11 And you will make a basin between the two walls for the water of the old pool, but you will not look to its Grand Maker, and you will not see the One who formed it long ago.12 In that day the Sovereign Lord, Jehovah of armies,Will call for weeping and mourning,For shaved heads and the wearing of sackcloth.13 But instead, there is celebration and rejoicing,The killing of cattle and the slaughtering of sheep,The eating of meat and the drinking of wine.‘Let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we will die.’”14 Then Jehovah of armies revealed himself in my ears: “‘This error will not be atoned in your behalf until you people die,’ says the Sovereign Lord, Jehovah of armies.”15 This is what the Sovereign Lord, Jehovah of armies, says: “Go in to this steward, to Shebʹna, who is in charge of the house, and say, 16 ‘What is your interest here, and who is there of interest to you here, that you hewed out a burial place here for yourself?’ He is hewing out his burial place in a high place; he is cutting out a resting-place for himself in a crag. 17 ‘Look! Jehovah will hurl you down violently, O man, and seize you forcibly. 18 He will certainly wrap you up tightly and hurl you like a ball into a wide land. There you will die, and there your glorious chariots will be, a disgrace to your master’s house. 19 And I will depose you from your position and throw you out of your office.20 “‘In that day I will call my servant E·liʹa·kim the son of Hil·kiʹah, 21 and I will clothe him with your robe and firmly bind your sash around him, and I will give your authority into his hand. And he will be a father to the inhabitants of Jerusalem and to the house of Judah. 22 And I will put the key of the house of David on his shoulder. He will open and no one will shut; and he will shut and no one will open. 23 I will drive him in as a peg in a lasting place, and he will become as a throne of glory to the house of his father. 24 And they will hang on him all the glory of the house of his father, the descendants and the offspring, all the small vessels, the bowl-shaped vessels, as well as all the large jars.25 “‘In that day,’ declares Jehovah of armies, ‘the peg that is driven in a lasting place will be removed, and it will be cut down and fall, and the load that it supported will fall to ruin, for Jehovah himself has spoken.’”
23 A pronouncement about Tyre:Wail, you ships of Tarʹshish!For the port has been destroyed; it cannot be entered.From the land of Kitʹtim it has been revealed to them. 2 Be silent, you inhabitants of the coastland.The merchants from Siʹdon who cross the sea have filled you. 3 Over many waters went the grain of Shiʹhor,The harvest of the Nile, her revenue,Bringing the profit of the nations. 4 Be ashamed, O Siʹdon, you stronghold of the sea,Because the sea has said:“I have not had birth pains, and I have not given birth,Nor have I brought up young men or raised young women.” 5 As when they heard the report about Egypt,People will be in anguish over the report about Tyre. 6 Cross over to Tarʹshish!Wail, you inhabitants of the coastland! 7 Is this your city that was exultant from long ago, from her early times?Her feet used to take her to distant lands to reside. 8 Who has decided this against Tyre,The bestower of crowns,Whose merchants were princes,Whose tradesmen were honored in all the earth? 9 Jehovah of armies himself has decided this,To profane her pride over all her beauty,To humiliate all those who were honored throughout the earth.10 Cross over your land like the Nile River, O daughter of Tarʹshish.There is no longer any shipyard.11 He has stretched his hand out over the sea;He has shaken kingdoms.Jehovah has ordered the annihilation of Phoe·niʹcia’s strongholds.12 And he says: “You will exult no more,O oppressed one, the virgin daughter of Siʹdon.Get up, cross over to Kitʹtim.Even there you will find no rest.”13 Look! The land of the Chal·deʹans.This is the people—As·syrʹi·a was not the one—They made her a place for those haunting the desert.They have erected their siege towers;They have stripped bare her fortified towers,Reducing her to a crumbling ruin.14 Wail, you ships of Tarʹshish,For your stronghold has been destroyed.15 In that day Tyre will be forgotten for 70 years, the same as the lifetime of one king. At the end of 70 years, it will happen to Tyre as in the song of a prostitute:16 “Take a harp, go around the city, O forgotten prostitute.Play your harp skillfully;Sing many songs,So that they will remember you.”17 At the end of 70 years, Jehovah will turn his attention to Tyre, and she will return to her hire and prostitute herself with all the world’s kingdoms on the face of the earth. 18 But her profit and her hire will become something holy to Jehovah. It will not be stored or laid away, because her hire will be for those dwelling before Jehovah, so that they may eat to satisfaction and wear elegant clothing.
24 Look! Jehovah is emptying the land and making it desolate.He turns it upside down and scatters its inhabitants. 2 It will be the same for everyone:The people as well as the priest,The servant and his master,The servant and her mistress,The buyer and the seller,The lender and the borrower,The creditor and the debtor. 3 The land will be completely emptied;It will be completely plundered,For Jehovah has spoken this word. 4 The land mourns; it is wasting away.The productive land withers; it is fading away.The prominent people of the land wither. 5 The land has been polluted by its inhabitants,For they have bypassed the laws,Changed the regulation,And broken the lasting covenant. 6 That is why the curse devours the land,And those inhabiting it are held guilty.That is why the inhabitants of the land have dwindled,And very few men are left. 7 The new wine mourns, the vine withers,And all those cheerful at heart are sighing. 8 The joy of the tambourines has ceased;The noise of the revelers has ended;The happy sound of the harp has ceased. 9 They drink wine without song,And alcohol tastes bitter to those drinking it.10 The deserted town is broken down;Every house is shut up so that no one can enter.11 They cry out for wine in the streets.All rejoicing has disappeared;The joy of the land has gone.12 The city is left in ruins;The gate has been crushed to a heap of rubble.13 For this is how it will be in the land, among the peoples:As when an olive tree is beaten,Like the gleaning when the grape harvest comes to an end.14 They will raise their voice,They will shout joyfully.From the sea they will proclaim the majesty of Jehovah.15 That is why they will glorify Jehovah in the region of light;In the islands of the sea they will glorify the name of Jehovah the God of Israel.16 From the ends of the earth we hear songs:“Glory to the Righteous One!”But I say: “I am wasting away, I am wasting away!Woe to me! The treacherous have acted treacherously;With treachery the treacherous have acted treacherously.”17 Terror and pits and traps await you, inhabitant of the land.18 Anyone fleeing from the sound of terror will fall into the pit,And anyone coming up from the pit will be caught in the trap.For the floodgates above will be opened,And the foundations of the land will quake.19 The land has burst apart;The land has been shaken up;The land convulses violently.20 The land staggers like a drunken man,And it sways back and forth like a hut in the wind.Its transgression weighs heavily on it,And it will fall, so that it will not rise up again.21 In that day Jehovah will turn his attention to the army of the heights aboveAnd to the kings of the earth upon the earth.22 And they will be gathered togetherLike prisoners gathered into a pit,And they will be shut up in the dungeon;After many days they will be given attention.23 The full moon will be abashed,And the shining sun will be ashamed,For Jehovah of armies has become King in Mount Zion and in Jerusalem,Glorious before the elders of his people.
25 O Jehovah, you are my God.I exalt you, I praise your name,For you have done wonderful things,Things purposed from ancient times,In faithfulness, in trustworthiness. 2 For you have turned a city into a pile of stones,A fortified town into a crumbling ruin.The foreigner’s tower is a city no more;It will never be rebuilt. 3 That is why a strong people will glorify you;The city of tyrannical nations will fear you. 4 For you have become a stronghold to the lowly,A stronghold to the poor in his distress,A refuge from the rainstorm,And a shade from the heat.When the blast of the tyrants is like a rainstorm against a wall, 5 As the heat in a parched land,You subdue the uproar of strangers.Like heat is subdued by the shadow of a cloud,So the song of the tyrants is silenced. 6 In this mountain Jehovah of armies will make for all the peoplesA banquet of rich dishes,A banquet of fine wine,Of rich dishes filled with marrow,Of fine, filtered wine. 7 In this mountain he will do away with the shroud that is enveloping all the peoplesAnd the covering that is woven over all the nations. 8 He will swallow up death forever,And the Sovereign Lord Jehovah will wipe away the tears from all faces.The reproach of his people he will take away from all the earth,For Jehovah himself has spoken it. 9 In that day they will say:“Look! This is our God!We have hoped in him,And he will save us.This is Jehovah!We have hoped in him.Let us be joyful and rejoice in the salvation by him.”10 For the hand of Jehovah will rest on this mountain,And Moʹab will be trampled on in its placeLike straw trampled into a pile of manure.11 He will slap out his hands into itLike a swimmer slapping out his hands to swim,And he will bring down its haughtinessWith the skillful movements of his hands.12 And the fortified city, with your high walls of security,He will bring down;He will knock it down to the ground, to the very dust.
26 In that day this song will be sung in the land of Judah:“We have a strong city.He makes salvation its walls and its ramparts. 2 Open up the gates so that the righteous nation may enter,A nation that is keeping faithful conduct. 3 You will safeguard those who fully lean on you;You will give them continuous peace,Because it is in you that they trust. 4 Trust in Jehovah forever,For Jah Jehovah is the eternal Rock. 5 For he has brought low those inhabiting the height, the lofty city.He brings it down,He brings it down to the earth;He casts it down to the dust. 6 The foot will trample it,The feet of the afflicted, the steps of the lowly.” 7 The path of the righteous one is upright.Because you are upright,You will smooth out the course of the righteous. 8 As we follow the path of your judgments, O Jehovah,Our hope is in you.We long for your name and your memorial. 9 In the night I long for you with my whole being,Yes, my spirit keeps looking for you;For when there are judgments from you for the earth,The inhabitants of the land learn about righteousness.10 Even if the wicked is shown favor,He will not learn righteousness.Even in the land of uprightness he will act wickedly,And he will not see the majesty of Jehovah.11 O Jehovah, your hand is raised, but they do not see it.They will see your zeal for your people and be put to shame.Yes, the fire for your adversaries will consume them.12 O Jehovah, you will grant us peace,Because everything we have doneYou have accomplished for us.13 O Jehovah our God, other masters besides you have ruled over us,But we make mention of your name alone.14 They are dead; they will not live.Powerless in death, they will not rise up.For you have turned your attention to themTo annihilate them and destroy all mention of them.15 You have enlarged the nation, O Jehovah,You have enlarged the nation;You have glorified yourself.You have greatly extended all the borders of the land.16 O Jehovah, during distress they turned to you;They poured out their prayer in a whisper when you disciplined them.17 Just as a pregnant woman about to give birthHas labor pains and cries out in pain,So we have been because of you, O Jehovah.18 We became pregnant, we had labor pains,But it is as if we have given birth to wind.We have not brought salvation to the land,And no one is born to inhabit the land.19 “Your dead will live.My corpses will rise up.Awake and shout joyfully,You residents in the dust!For your dew is as the dew of the morning,And the earth will let those powerless in death come to life.20 Go, my people, enter your inner rooms,And shut your doors behind you.Hide yourself for a brief momentUntil the wrath has passed by.21 For look! Jehovah is coming from his placeTo call the inhabitants of the land to account for their error,And the land will expose her bloodshedAnd will no longer cover over her slain.”
27 In that day Jehovah, with his harsh and great and strong sword,Will turn his attention to Le·viʹa·than, the gliding serpent,To Le·viʹa·than, the twisting serpent,And he will kill the monster that is in the sea. 2 In that day sing to her:“A vineyard of foaming wine! 3 I, Jehovah, am safeguarding her.Every moment I water her.I safeguard her night and day,So that no one may harm her. 4 There is no wrath in me.Who will confront me with thornbushes and weeds in the battle?I will trample them and set them on fire all together. 5 Otherwise, let him hold fast to my stronghold.Let him make peace with me;Peace let him make with me.” 6 In the coming days Jacob will take root,Israel will blossom and sprout,And they will fill the land with produce. 7 Must he be struck with the stroke of the one striking him?Or must he be killed as with the slaughter of his slain? 8 With a startling cry you will contend with her when sending her away.He will expel her with his fierce blast in the day of the east wind. 9 So in this way the error of Jacob will be atoned for,And this will be the full fruitage when his sin is taken away:He will make all the stones of the altarLike chalkstones that have been pulverized,And no sacred poles or incense stands will be left.10 For the fortified city will be deserted;The pastures will be forsaken and abandoned like a wilderness.There the calf will graze and lie downAnd will consume her branches.11 When her twigs have dried up,Women will come and break them off,Making fires with them.For this people is without understanding.That is why their Maker will show them no mercy,And the One who formed them will show them no favor.12 In that day Jehovah will beat out the fruit from the flowing stream of the River to the Wadi of Egypt, and you will be gathered up one after the other, O people of Israel. 13 In that day a great horn will be blown, and those who are perishing in the land of As·syrʹi·a and those dispersed in the land of Egypt will come and bow down to Jehovah in the holy mountain in Jerusalem.
28 Woe to the showy crown of the drunkards of Eʹphra·imAnd the fading blossom of its glorious beauty,Which is on the head of the fertile valley of those overcome with wine! 2 Look! Jehovah has someone strong and mighty.Like a thundering hailstorm, a destructive windstorm,Like a thunderstorm of powerful floodwaters,He will forcefully hurl it down to the earth. 3 The showy crowns of the drunkards of Eʹphra·imWill be trampled underfoot. 4 And the fading flower of its glorious beauty,Which is on the head of the fertile valley,Will become like the early fig before summer.When someone sees it, he swallows it as soon as it is in his hand.5 In that day Jehovah of armies will become a glorious crown and a beautiful garland to those left of his people. 6 And he will become a spirit of justice to the one who sits in judgment and a source of mightiness to those who repel the attack at the gate. 7 And these also go astray because of wine;Their alcoholic beverages make them stagger.Priest and prophet go astray because of alcohol;The wine confuses them,And they stagger from their alcohol;Their vision makes them go astray,And they stumble in judgment. 8 For their tables are full of filthy vomit—There is no place without it. 9 To whom will one impart knowledge,And to whom will one explain the message?To those who have just been weaned from milk,Those just taken away from the breasts?10 For it is “command after command, command after command,Line by line, line by line,A little here, a little there.”11 So by means of those with stammering speech and a foreign language, he will speak to this people. 12 He once told them: “This is the resting-place. Let the weary one rest; this is the place of refreshment,” but they refused to listen. 13 So to them the word of Jehovah will be:“Command after command, command after command,Line by line, line by line,A little here, a little there,”So that when they walk,They will stumble and fall backwardAnd be broken and ensnared and caught.14 So hear the word of Jehovah, you boasters,You rulers of this people in Jerusalem,15 For you men say:“We have made a covenant with Death,And with the Grave we have made an agreement.When the raging flash flood passes through,It will not reach us,For we have made a lie our refugeAnd we have hidden ourselves in falsehood.”16 Therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says:“Here I am laying as a foundation in Zion a tested stone,The precious cornerstone of a sure foundation.No one exercising faith will panic.17 And I will make justice the measuring lineAnd righteousness the leveling tool.The hail will sweep away the refuge of lies,And the waters will flood out the hiding place.18 Your covenant with Death will be dissolved,And your agreement with the Grave will not stand.When the raging flash flood passes through,You will be crushed by it.19 As often as it passes through,It will sweep you away;For it will pass through morning after morning,During the day and during the night.Only terror will make them understand what was heard.”20 For the bed is too short to stretch out on,And the woven sheet is too narrow to wrap up in.21 For Jehovah will rise up as at Mount Pe·raʹzim;He will rouse himself as in the valley near Gibʹe·on,That he may do his deed—his strange deed—And that he may carry out his work—his unusual work.22 Now do not scoff,So that your bonds may not be further tightened,For I have heard from the Sovereign Lord, Jehovah of armies,That an extermination has been determined for all the land.23 Give ear and listen to my voice;Pay attention and listen to what I say.24 Does the plower keep plowing all day before he sows seed?Does he continually break up and harrow his ground?25 When he has smoothed out its surface,Does he not then scatter black cumin and sow cumin,And does he not plant wheat, millet, and barley in their placesAnd spelt around the edges?26 For He teaches him the right way;His God instructs him.27 For black cumin is not crushed with a threshing sledge,And a wagon wheel is not driven over cumin.Rather, black cumin is beaten out with a rod,And cumin with a staff.28 Does a person crush grain for bread?No, he does not thresh it incessantly;And when he drives the roller of his wagon over it with his horses,He does not crush it.29 This also comes from Jehovah of armies,Whose counsel is wonderfulAnd whose achievements are great.
29 “Woe to Arʹi·el, Arʹi·el, the city where David encamped!Continue year after year;Let the cycle of festivals continue. 2 But I will bring distress on Arʹi·el,And there will be mourning and lamentation,And she will become to me like an altar hearth of God. 3 I will encamp on all sides against you,And I will besiege you with a palisadeAnd raise up siegeworks against you. 4 You will be brought low;From the ground you will speak,And what you say will be muffled by dust.Your voice will come from the groundLike the voice of a spirit medium,And your words will chirp from the dust. 5 The crowd of your enemies will be like fine powder,The crowd of the tyrants just like the blowing chaff.And it will happen in an instant, suddenly. 6 Jehovah of armies will give you his attentionWith thunder and earthquake and a great noise,With storm wind and tempest and the flames of a consuming fire.” 7 Then the crowd of all the nations waging war against Arʹi·el—All those waging war against her,The siege towers against her,And those bringing distress on her—Will become like a dream, a vision of the night. 8 Yes, it will be just as when someone hungry dreams that he is eating,But he wakes up hungry,And as when someone thirsty dreams that he is drinking,But he wakes up tired and thirsty.So it will happen with the crowd of all the nationsThat wage war against Mount Zion. 9 Be stunned and amazed;Blind yourselves and be blinded.They are drunk, but not with wine;They are staggering, but not from alcohol.10 For Jehovah has poured a spirit of deep sleep on you;He has closed your eyes, the prophets,And he has covered your heads, the visionaries.11 Every vision becomes for you like the words of a sealed book. When they give it to someone who can read, saying: “Read this out loud, please,” he will say: “I cannot, for it is sealed up.” 12 And when they give the book to someone who cannot read, saying: “Read this, please,” he will say: “I cannot read at all.”13 Jehovah says: “This people approaches me with their mouthAnd they honor me with their lips,But their heart is far removed from me;And their fear of me is based on commands of men that they have been taught.14 Therefore, I am the One who will again do wonderful things with this people,With wonder upon wonder;And the wisdom of their wise men will perish,And the understanding of their discreet men will be hidden.”15 Woe to those who go to great lengths to conceal their plans from Jehovah.Their deeds are done in a dark place,While they say: “Who sees us?Who knows about us?”16 How you twist things!Should the potter be regarded the same as the clay?Should what is made say about its maker:“He did not make me”?And does what is formed say about its former:“He shows no understanding”?17 In just a short time, Lebʹa·non will be turned into an orchard,And the orchard will be regarded as a forest.18 In that day the deaf will hear the words of the book,And out of the gloom and darkness the eyes of the blind will see.19 The meek will rejoice greatly in Jehovah,And the poor among men will be joyful in the Holy One of Israel.20 For the tyrant will be no more,The boaster will come to his finish,And all those keeping alert to do harm will be destroyed,21 Those who with a false word make others guilty,Who lay traps for the defender in the city gate,And who with empty arguments deny justice to the righteous one.22 So this is what Jehovah, who redeemed Abraham, says to the house of Jacob:“Jacob will no longer be ashamed,And no more will his face grow pale.23 For when he sees his children,Who are the work of my hands, in his midst,They will sanctify my name;Yes, they will sanctify the Holy One of Jacob,And they will stand in awe of the God of Israel.24 Those who are wayward in spirit will acquire understanding,And those who complain will accept instruction.”
3 For look! the true Lord, Jehovah of armies,Is removing from Jerusalem and Judah every kind of support and supply,All support of bread and water, 2 Mighty man and warrior,Judge and prophet, diviner and elder, 3 Chief of 50, dignitary, and adviser,The expert magician and the skilled charmer. 4 I will make boys their princes,And the unstable will rule over them. 5 The people will oppress one another,Each one his fellow man.The boy will assault the old man,And the lightly esteemed one will defy the respected one. 6 Each one will take hold of his brother in his father’s house and say:“You have a cloak—you be our commander.Take charge of this overthrown pile of ruins.” 7 But he will protest in that day:“I will not be your wound dresser;I have no food or clothing in my house.Do not make me commander over the people.” 8 For Jerusalem has stumbled,And Judah has fallen,Because in word and deed they are against Jehovah;They behave defiantly in his glorious presence. 9 The expression of their faces testifies against them,And they proclaim their sin like Sodʹom;They do not try to hide it.Woe to them, for they are bringing disaster on themselves!10 Tell the righteous that it will go well for them;They will be rewarded for what they do.11 Woe to the wicked one!Disaster will befall him,For what his hands have done will be done to him!12 As for my people, their taskmasters are abusive,And women rule over them.My people, your leaders are causing you to wander,And they confuse the direction of your paths.13 Jehovah is taking his position to accuse;He is standing up to pass sentence on peoples.14 Jehovah will enter into judgment with the elders and princes of his people.“You have burned down the vineyard,And what you have stolen from the poor is in your houses.15 How dare you crush my peopleAnd grind the faces of the poor in the dirt?” declares the Sovereign Lord, Jehovah of armies.16 Jehovah says: “Because the daughters of Zion are haughty,Walking with their heads high,Flirting with their eyes, skipping along,Making a tinkling sound with their anklets,17 Jehovah will also strike the head of the daughters of Zion with scabs,And Jehovah will make their forehead bare.18 In that day Jehovah will take away the beauty of their bangles,The headbands and the crescent-shaped ornaments,19 The earrings, the bracelets, and the veils,20 The headdresses, the ankle chains, and the breastbands,The perfume receptacles and the charms,21 The finger rings and the nose rings,22 The ceremonial robes, the overtunics, the cloaks, and the purses,23 The hand mirrors and the linen garments,The turbans and the veils.24 Instead of balsam oil, there will be a rotten smell;Instead of a belt, a rope;Instead of a beautiful hairstyle, baldness;Instead of a rich garment, a garment of sackcloth;And a brand mark instead of beauty.25 By the sword your men will fall,And your mighty men in battle.26 Her entrances will mourn and grieve,And she will sit on the ground desolate.”
30 “Woe to the stubborn sons,” declares Jehovah,“Who carry out plans that are not mine,Who make alliances, but not by my spirit,In order to add sin to sin. 2 They go down to Egypt without consulting me,To take shelter under Pharʹaoh’s protectionAnd to take refuge in the shadow of Egypt! 3 But the protection of Pharʹaoh will become for you a reason for shame,And refuge in Egypt’s shadow a cause for humiliation. 4 For his princes are in Zoʹan,And his envoys have reached Haʹnes. 5 They will all be put to shameBy a people who can bring no benefit to them,Who offer no help and no benefit,Only shame and disgrace.”6 A pronouncement against the beasts of the south:Through the land of distress and hardship,Of the lion, the roaring lion,Of the viper and the flying fiery snake,They carry their wealth on the backs of donkeysAnd their supplies on the humps of camels.But these things will not benefit the people. 7 For Egypt’s help is completely useless.So I have called this one: “Raʹhab, who sits still.” 8 “Now go, write it on a tablet in their presence,And inscribe it in a book,So that it may serve for a future dayAs a permanent witness. 9 For they are a rebellious people, deceitful sons,Sons who are unwilling to hear the law of Jehovah.10 They say to the seers, ‘Do not see,’And to the visionaries, ‘Do not tell us truthful visions.Tell us flattering things; envision deceptive illusions.11 Turn aside from the way; deviate from the path.Quit putting before us the Holy One of Israel.’”12 Therefore this is what the Holy One of Israel says:“Since you reject this wordAnd you trust in fraud and deceitAnd you rely on these,13 So this error will be for you like a broken wall,Like a bulging high wall ready to fall.It will crash suddenly, in an instant.14 It will be broken like a large potter’s jar,So completely smashed that no fragment among its pieces will be leftTo rake the fire from the fireplaceOr to scoop water from a puddle.”15 For this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah, the Holy One of Israel, says:“By returning to me and resting, you will be saved;Your strength will be in keeping calm and showing trust.”But you were unwilling.16 Instead, you said: “No, we will flee on horses!”So flee you will.“And on swift horses we will ride!”So those pursuing you will be swift.17 A thousand will tremble at the threat of one;At the threat of five you will fleeUntil what is left of you is like a mast on the top of a mountain,Like a signal pole on a hill.18 But Jehovah is waiting patiently to show you favor,And he will rise up to show you mercy.For Jehovah is a God of justice.Happy are all those keeping in expectation of him.19 When the people dwell in Zion, in Jerusalem, you will by no means weep. He will surely show you favor at the sound of your cry for help; he will answer you as soon as he hears it. 20 Though Jehovah will give you bread in the form of distress and water in the form of oppression, your Grand Instructor will no longer hide himself, and you will see your Grand Instructor with your own eyes. 21 And your own ears will hear a word behind you saying, “This is the way. Walk in it,” in case you should go to the right or in case you should go to the left.22 And you will defile the silver overlay of your graven images and the golden plating of your metal statues. You will cast them away like a menstrual cloth and say to them, “Be gone!” 23 And he will give the rain for the seed you sow in the ground, and the bread that the ground produces will be abundant and rich. In that day your livestock will graze in spacious pastures. 24 And the cattle and the donkeys that work the ground will eat fodder seasoned with sorrel, which was winnowed with the shovel and the pitchfork. 25 And on every tall mountain and on every high hill will be streams and watercourses, in the day of the great slaughter when the towers fall. 26 And the light of the full moon will become like the light of the sun; and the light of the sun will become seven times stronger, like the light of seven days, in the day that Jehovah binds up the breakdown of his people and heals the severe wound from the blow he inflicted.27 Look! The name of Jehovah is coming from far away,Burning with his anger and with heavy clouds.His lips are full of indignation,And his tongue is like a consuming fire.28 His spirit is like a flooding torrent that reaches clear to the neck,To shake the nations in a sieve of destruction;And the peoples will have a bridle in their jaws that leads them astray.29 But your song will be like the one sung in the nightWhen you prepare for a festival,And your heart will rejoice like oneWho walks with a fluteOn his way to the mountain of Jehovah, to the Rock of Israel.30 Jehovah will make his majestic voice heardAnd reveal his arm as it descends in the heat of anger,With the flame of a consuming fire,A cloudburst and a thunderstorm and hailstones.31 For because of the voice of Jehovah, As·syrʹi·a will be struck with terror;He will strike it with a rod.32 And every swing of his rod of punishmentThat Jehovah will bring down on As·syrʹi·aWill be accompanied by tambourines and harpsAs he brandishes his arm against them in battle.33 For his Toʹpheth is already prepared;It is also made ready for the king.He has made the woodpile deep and wide,With an abundance of fire and wood.The breath of Jehovah, like a torrent of sulfur,Will set fire to it.
31 Woe to those who go down to Egypt for assistance,Who rely on horses,Who trust in war chariots because they are numerous,And in warhorses because they are mighty.But they do not look to the Holy One of Israel,And they do not search for Jehovah. 2 But he is also wise and will bring calamity,And he will not take back his words.He will rise up against the house of evildoersAnd against those who help wrongdoers. 3 The Egyptians, though, are mere men and not God;Their horses are flesh and not spirit.When Jehovah stretches out his hand,Whoever offers help will stumbleAnd whoever is helped will fall;They will all perish at the same time. 4 For this is what Jehovah has said to me:“Just as the lion growls, a strong young lion, over its prey,When a whole group of shepherds is called together against it,And it is not terrified by their voiceOr daunted by their commotion,So will Jehovah of armies come down to wage warOver Mount Zion and over her hill. 5 Like swooping birds, so Jehovah of armies will defend Jerusalem.He will defend her and save her.He will spare her and rescue her.”6 “Return to the One against whom you have blatantly revolted, O people of Israel. 7 For in that day each one will reject his worthless gods of silver and his valueless gods of gold, which your own hands sinfully made. 8 And the As·syrʹi·an will fall by the sword, not of a man;And a sword, not of a human, will devour him.He will flee because of the sword,And his young men will be put to forced labor. 9 His crag will pass away because of sheer fright,And his princes will be terrified because of the signal pole,” declares Jehovah,Whose light is in Zion and whose furnace is in Jerusalem.
32 Look! A king will reign for righteousness,And princes will rule for justice. 2 And each one will be like a hiding place from the wind,A place of concealment from the rainstorm,Like streams of water in a waterless land,Like the shadow of a massive crag in a parched land. 3 Then the eyes of those seeing will no longer be pasted shut,And the ears of those hearing will pay attention. 4 The heart of those who are impetuous will ponder over knowledge,And the stammering tongue will speak fluently and clearly. 5 The senseless one will no longer be called generous,And the unprincipled man will not be called noble; 6 For the senseless one will speak nonsense,And his heart will devise harmful things,To promote apostasy and to speak what is wayward against Jehovah,To cause the hungry one to go unfedAnd to deprive the thirsty one of something to drink. 7 The devices of the unprincipled man are bad;He promotes shameful conductTo ruin the afflicted one with lies,Even when the poor speaks what is right. 8 But the generous one has generous intentions,And in generous endeavors he perseveres. 9 “You complacent women, get up and listen to my voice!You carefree daughters, pay attention to what I say!10 In a little over a year, you who are carefree will shudder,Because no fruit will have been gathered when the grape harvest ends.11 Tremble, you complacent women!Shudder, you who are carefree!Strip yourselves bare,And put sackcloth around your hips.12 Beat your breasts in lamentationOver the desirable fields and the fruitful vine.13 For the ground of my people will be covered with thorns and briars;They will cover all the houses of rejoicing,Yes, the city of exultation.14 For the fortified tower has been forsaken;The noisy city has been abandoned.Oʹphel and the watchtower have become a permanent wasteland,A delight for wild donkeys,A pasture for the flocks,15 Until the spirit is poured out on us from above,And the wilderness becomes an orchard,And the orchard is regarded as a forest.16 Then justice will reside in the wilderness,And righteousness will dwell in the orchard.17 The result of true righteousness will be peace,And the fruitage of true righteousness will be lasting tranquillity and security.18 My people will dwell in a peaceful abiding place,In secure dwellings and in tranquil resting-places.19 But the hail will flatten the forest,And the city will be completely leveled.20 Happy are you who sow seed alongside all waters,Who send out the bull and the donkey.”
33 Woe to you, you destroyer who has not been destroyed;You betrayer who has not been betrayed!When you finish destroying, you will be destroyed.When you finish betraying, you will be betrayed. 2 O Jehovah, show us favor.Our hope is in you.Become our arm every morning,Yes, our salvation in the time of distress. 3 At the sound of turmoil peoples flee.When you rise up, nations scatter. 4 As the voracious locusts gather, so your spoil will be gathered;People will rush on it like swarms of locusts. 5 Jehovah will be exalted,For he resides in the heights above.He will fill Zion with justice and righteousness. 6 He is the stability of your times;An abundance of salvation, wisdom, knowledge, and the fear of Jehovah—This is his treasure. 7 Look! Their heroes cry out in the street;The messengers of peace weep bitterly. 8 The highways are deserted;There is no one traveling on the pathways.He has broken the covenant;He has rejected the cities;He shows no regard for mortal man. 9 The land mourns and withers away.Lebʹa·non is ashamed; it has decayed.Sharʹon has become like the desert,And Baʹshan and Carʹmel shake off their leaves.10 “Now I will rise up,” says Jehovah,“Now I will exalt myself;Now I will magnify myself.11 You conceive dried grass and give birth to stubble.Your own spirit will consume you like a fire.12 And peoples will become as the burnings of lime.As thorns cut down, they will be set ablaze with fire.13 You who are far away, listen to what I will do!And you who are nearby, acknowledge my might!14 The sinners in Zion are in dread;Trembling has seized the apostates:‘Who of us can live where there is a consuming fire?Who of us can live with unquenchable flames?’15 The one who walks in continual righteousness,Who speaks what is upright,Who rejects dishonest, fraudulent gain,Whose hands refuse a bribe rather than grabbing it,Who closes his ear to talk of bloodshed,And who shuts his eyes to avoid seeing what is bad16 —He will reside in the heights;His secure refuge will be in rocky strongholds,His bread will be provided,And his water supply will never fail.”17 Your eyes will behold a king in his splendor;They will see a land far away.18 In your heart you will recall the terror:“Where is the secretary?Where is the one who weighed out the tribute?Where is the one who counted the towers?”19 You will no more see the insolent people,A people whose language is too obscure to comprehend,Whose stammering tongue you cannot understand.20 Behold Zion, the city of our festivals!Your eyes will see Jerusalem as a tranquil dwelling place,A tent that will not be moved.Never will its tent pins be pulled out,And none of its ropes will be torn apart.21 But there the Majestic One, Jehovah,Will be for us a region of rivers, of wide canals,Where no galley fleet will goAnd no majestic ships will pass by.22 For Jehovah is our Judge,Jehovah is our Lawgiver,Jehovah is our King;He is the One who will save us.23 Your ropes will hang loose;They cannot hold up the mast nor spread the sail.At that time an abundance of spoil will be divided up;Even the lame will take much plunder.24 And no resident will say: “I am sick.”The people dwelling in the land will be pardoned for their error.
34 Come close to hear, you nations,And pay attention, you peoples.Let the earth and that which fills it listen,The land and all its produce. 2 For Jehovah’s indignation is against all the nations,And his wrath is against all their army.He will devote them to destruction;He will give them to the slaughter. 3 Their slain will be thrown out,And the stench of their carcasses will ascend;The mountains will melt because of their blood. 4 All the army of the heavens will rot away,And the heavens will be rolled up like a scroll.All their army will wither away,As a withered leaf falls from the vineAnd a shriveled fig from the fig tree. 5 “For in the heavens my sword will be drenched.It will descend on Eʹdom in judgment,On the people whom I devoted to destruction. 6 Jehovah has a sword; it will be covered with blood.It will be covered with the fat,With the blood of young rams and goats,With the kidney fat of rams.For Jehovah has a sacrifice in Bozʹrah,A great slaughter in the land of Eʹdom. 7 The wild bulls will go down with them,The young bulls with the powerful ones.Their land will be drenched in blood,And their dust will be soaked with fat.” 8 For Jehovah has a day of vengeance,A year of retribution for the legal case over Zion. 9 Her streams will be changed into pitch,And her dust into sulfur,And her land will become like burning pitch.10 By night or by day it will not be extinguished;Its smoke will keep ascending forever.From generation to generation she will remain devastated;No one will pass through her forever and ever.11 The pelican and the porcupine will possess her,And long-eared owls and ravens will reside in her.He will stretch out over her the measuring line of emptinessAnd the plumb line of desolation.12 None of her nobles will be called to the kingship,And all her princes will come to nothing.13 Thorns will grow in her fortified towers,Nettles and thorny weeds in her fortresses.She will become a lair of jackals,An enclosure for ostriches.14 Desert creatures will meet up with howling animals,And the wild goat will call to its companion.Yes, there the nightjar will settle and find a place of rest.15 There the arrow snake will make its nest and lay eggs,And it will hatch them and gather them in its shadow.Yes, there the kites will gather, each one with her mate.16 Search in the book of Jehovah and read it out loud:Not one of them will be missing;None of them will be lacking a mate,For it is the mouth of Jehovah that has given the order,And it is his spirit that has gathered them together.17 He is the One who has cast the lot for them,And his own hand has measured out their assigned place.They will possess it for all time;They will reside in it throughout all generations.
35 The wilderness and the parched land will exult,And the desert plain will be joyful and blossom as the saffron. 2 Without fail it will blossom;It will rejoice and shout for joy.The glory of Lebʹa·non will be given to it,The splendor of Carʹmel and of Sharʹon.They will see the glory of Jehovah, the splendor of our God. 3 Strengthen the weak hands,And make firm the knees that are shaking. 4 Say to those who are anxious at heart:“Be strong. Do not be afraid.Look! Your own God will come with vengeance,God will come with retribution.He will come and save you.” 5 At that time the eyes of the blind will be opened,And the ears of the deaf will be unstopped. 6 At that time the lame will leap like the deer,And the tongue of the speechless will shout for joy.For waters will burst forth in the wilderness,And streams in the desert plain. 7 The heat-parched ground will become a reedy pool,And the thirsty ground springs of water.In the lairs where jackals rested,There will be green grass and reeds and papyrus. 8 And a highway will be there,Yes, a way called the Way of Holiness.The unclean one will not travel on it.It is reserved for the one walking on the way;No one foolish will stray onto it. 9 No lion will be there,And no vicious wild beasts will come on it.They will not be found there;Only the repurchased ones will walk there.10 Those redeemed by Jehovah will return and come to Zion with a joyful cry.Unending joy will crown their heads.Exultation and rejoicing will be theirs,And grief and sighing will flee away.
36 In the 14th year of King Hez·e·kiʹah, Sen·nachʹer·ib the king of As·syrʹi·a came up against all the fortified cities of Judah and captured them. 2 The king of As·syrʹi·a then sent the Rabʹsha·keh with a vast army from Laʹchish to King Hez·e·kiʹah in Jerusalem. They took up a position by the conduit of the upper pool, which is at the highway of the laundryman’s field. 3 Then E·liʹa·kim son of Hil·kiʹah, who was in charge of the household, Shebʹna the secretary, and Joʹah son of Aʹsaph the recorder came out to him.4 So the Rabʹsha·keh said to them: “Please, say to Hez·e·kiʹah, ‘This is what the great king, the king of As·syrʹi·a, says: “What is the basis for your confidence? 5 You are saying, ‘I have a strategy and the power to wage war,’ but these are empty words. In whom have you put trust, so that you dare to rebel against me? 6 Look! You trust in the support of this crushed reed, Egypt, which if a man should lean on it would enter into his palm and pierce it. That is the way Pharʹaoh king of Egypt is to all those who trust in him. 7 And if you should say to me, ‘We trust in Jehovah our God,’ is he not the one whose high places and altars Hez·e·kiʹah has removed, while he says to Judah and Jerusalem, ‘You should bow down before this altar’?”’ 8 So now make this wager, please, with my lord the king of As·syrʹi·a: I will give you 2,000 horses if you are able to find enough riders for them. 9 How, then, could you drive back even one governor who is the least of my lord’s servants, while you put your trust in Egypt for chariots and for horsemen? 10 Now is it without authorization from Jehovah that I have come up against this land to destroy it? Jehovah himself said to me, ‘Go up against this land and destroy it.’”11 At this E·liʹa·kim and Shebʹna and Joʹah said to the Rabʹsha·keh: “Speak to your servants, please, in the Ar·a·maʹic language, for we can understand it; do not speak to us in the language of the Jews in the hearing of the people on the wall.” 12 But the Rabʹsha·keh said: “Is it just to your lord and to you that my lord sent me to speak these words? Is it not also to the men who sit on the wall, those who will eat their own excrement and drink their own urine along with you?”13 Then the Rabʹsha·keh stood and called out loudly in the language of the Jews, saying: “Hear the word of the great king, the king of As·syrʹi·a. 14 This is what the king says, ‘Do not let Hez·e·kiʹah deceive you, for he is not able to rescue you. 15 And do not let Hez·e·kiʹah cause you to trust in Jehovah by saying: “Jehovah will surely rescue us, and this city will not be given into the hand of the king of As·syrʹi·a.” 16 Do not listen to Hez·e·kiʹah, for this is what the king of As·syrʹi·a says: “Make peace with me and surrender, and each of you will eat from his own vine and from his own fig tree and will drink the water of his own cistern, 17 until I come and take you to a land like your own land, a land of grain and new wine, a land of bread and vineyards. 18 Do not let Hez·e·kiʹah mislead you by saying, ‘Jehovah will rescue us.’ Have any of the gods of the nations rescued their land out of the hand of the king of As·syrʹi·a? 19 Where are the gods of Haʹmath and Arʹpad? Where are the gods of Seph·ar·vaʹim? And have they rescued Sa·marʹi·a out of my hand? 20 Who among all the gods of these lands have rescued their land out of my hand, so that Jehovah should rescue Jerusalem out of my hand?”’”21 But they kept silent and did not say a word to him in reply, for the order of the king was, “You must not answer him.” 22 But E·liʹa·kim son of Hil·kiʹah, who was in charge of the household, Shebʹna the secretary, and Joʹah son of Aʹsaph the recorder came to Hez·e·kiʹah with their garments ripped apart and told him the words of the Rabʹsha·keh.
37 As soon as King Hez·e·kiʹah heard this, he ripped his garments apart and covered himself with sackcloth and went into the house of Jehovah. 2 Then he sent E·liʹa·kim, who was in charge of the household, Shebʹna the secretary, and the elders of the priests, covered with sackcloth, to the prophet Isaiah, the son of Aʹmoz. 3 They said to him: “This is what Hez·e·kiʹah says, ‘This day is a day of distress, of rebuke, and of disgrace; for the children are ready to be born, but there is no strength to give birth. 4 Perhaps Jehovah your God will hear the words of the Rabʹsha·keh, whom the king of As·syrʹi·a his lord sent to taunt the living God, and he will call him to account for the words that Jehovah your God has heard. So offer up a prayer in behalf of the remnant who have survived.’”5 So the servants of King Hez·e·kiʹah went in to Isaiah, 6 and Isaiah said to them: “This is what you should say to your lord, ‘This is what Jehovah says: “Do not be afraid because of the words that you heard, the words with which the attendants of the king of As·syrʹi·a blasphemed me. 7 Here I am putting a thought in his mind, and he will hear a report and return to his own land; and I will make him fall by the sword in his own land.”’”8 After the Rabʹsha·keh heard that the king of As·syrʹi·a had pulled away from Laʹchish, he returned to him and found him fighting against Libʹnah. 9 Now the king heard it said about King Tir·haʹkah of E·thi·oʹpi·a: “He has come out to fight against you.” When he heard this, he sent messengers again to Hez·e·kiʹah, saying: 10 “This is what you should say to King Hez·e·kiʹah of Judah, ‘Do not let your God in whom you trust deceive you by saying: “Jerusalem will not be given into the hand of the king of As·syrʹi·a.” 11 Look! You have heard what the kings of As·syrʹi·a did to all the lands by devoting them to destruction. Will you alone be rescued? 12 Did the gods of the nations that my forefathers destroyed rescue them? Where are Goʹzan, Haʹran, Reʹzeph, and the people of Eʹden who were in Tel-asʹsar? 13 Where is the king of Haʹmath, the king of Arʹpad, and the king of the cities of Seph·ar·vaʹim, and of Heʹna, and of Ivʹvah?’”14 Hez·e·kiʹah took the letters out of the hand of the messengers and read them. Hez·e·kiʹah then went up to the house of Jehovah and spread them out before Jehovah. 15 And Hez·e·kiʹah began to pray to Jehovah and say: 16 “O Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, sitting enthroned above the cherubs, you alone are the true God of all the kingdoms of the earth. You made the heavens and the earth. 17 Incline your ear, O Jehovah, and hear! Open your eyes, O Jehovah, and see! Hear all the words that Sen·nachʹer·ib has sent to taunt the living God. 18 It is a fact, O Jehovah, that the kings of As·syrʹi·a have devastated all the lands, as well as their own land. 19 And they have thrown their gods into the fire, because they were not gods but the work of human hands, wood and stone. That is why they could destroy them. 20 But now, O Jehovah our God, save us out of his hand, so that all the kingdoms of the earth may know that you alone are God, O Jehovah.”21 Isaiah son of Aʹmoz then sent this message to Hez·e·kiʹah: “This is what Jehovah the God of Israel says, ‘Because you prayed to me concerning King Sen·nachʹer·ib of As·syrʹi·a, 22 this is the word that Jehovah has spoken against him:“The virgin daughter of Zion despises you, she scoffs at you.The daughter of Jerusalem shakes her head at you.23 Whom have you taunted and blasphemed?Against whom have you raised your voiceAnd lifted your arrogant eyes?It is against the Holy One of Israel!24 Through your servants you have taunted Jehovah and said,‘With the multitude of my war chariotsI will ascend the heights of mountains,The remotest parts of Lebʹa·non.I will cut down its lofty cedars, its choice juniper trees.I will enter its highest retreats, its densest forests.25 I will dig wells and drink waters;I will dry up the streams of Egypt with the soles of my feet.’26 Have you not heard? From long ago it was determined.From days gone by I have prepared it.Now I will bring it about.You will turn fortified cities into desolate piles of ruins.27 Their inhabitants will be helpless;They will be terrified and put to shame.They will become as vegetation of the field and green grass,As grass of the roofs that is scorched by the east wind.28 But I well know when you sit, when you go out, when you come in,And when you are enraged against me,29 Because your rage against me and your roaring have reached my ears.So I will put my hook in your nose and my bridle between your lips,And I will lead you back the way you came.”30 “‘And this will be the sign for you: This year you will eat what grows on its own; and in the second year, you will eat grain that sprouts from that; but in the third year you will sow seed and reap, and you will plant vineyards and eat their fruitage. 31 Those of the house of Judah who escape, those who are left, will take root downward and produce fruit upward. 32 For a remnant will go out of Jerusalem and survivors from Mount Zion. The zeal of Jehovah of armies will do this.33 “‘Therefore this is what Jehovah says about the king of As·syrʹi·a:“He will not come into this cityOr shoot an arrow thereOr confront it with a shieldOr cast up a siege rampart against it.”’34 ‘By the way he came he will return;He will not come into this city,’ declares Jehovah.35 ‘I will defend this city and save it for my own sakeAnd for the sake of my servant David.’”36 And the angel of Jehovah went out and struck down 185,000 men in the camp of the As·syrʹi·ans. When people rose up early in the morning, they saw all the dead bodies. 37 So King Sen·nachʹer·ib of As·syrʹi·a departed and returned to Ninʹe·veh and stayed there. 38 And as he was bowing down at the house of his god Nisʹroch, his own sons A·dramʹme·lech and Shar·eʹzer struck him down with the sword and then escaped to the land of Arʹa·rat. And his son Eʹsar-hadʹdon became king in his place.
38 In those days Hez·e·kiʹah became sick and was at the point of death. The prophet Isaiah the son of Aʹmoz came and said to him, “This is what Jehovah says: ‘Give instructions to your household, for you will die; you will not recover.’” 2 At that Hez·e·kiʹah turned his face to the wall and began to pray to Jehovah: 3 “I beg you, O Jehovah, remember, please, how I have walked before you faithfully and with a complete heart, and I have done what was good in your eyes.” And Hez·e·kiʹah began to weep profusely.4 Then the word of Jehovah came to Isaiah, saying: 5 “Go back and say to Hez·e·kiʹah, ‘This is what Jehovah the God of David your forefather says: “I have heard your prayer. I have seen your tears. Here I am adding 15 years to your life, 6 and I will rescue you and this city out of the hand of the king of As·syrʹi·a, and I will defend this city. 7 This is the sign from Jehovah to show you that Jehovah will carry out the word that he has spoken: 8 Here I will make the declining shadow of the sun on the stairway of Aʹhaz go back ten steps.”’” So the sun went back ten steps on the stairway that it had already descended.9 A writing of King Hez·e·kiʹah of Judah when he became sick and recovered from his sickness.10 I said: “In the middle of my lifeI must go into the gates of the Grave.I will be deprived of my remaining years.”11 I said: “I will not see Jah, Jah in the land of the living.I will look no more on mankindWhen I am with the inhabitants of the place where everything ceases.12 My own dwelling has been pulled out and removed from meLike the tent of a shepherd.I have rolled up my life like a loom worker;He cuts me off like the threads of the warp.From daylight to nightfall you keep bringing me to an end.13 I calm myself until the morning.Like a lion, he keeps breaking all my bones;From daylight to nightfall you keep bringing me to an end.14 Like the swift or the thrush, so I keep chirping;I keep cooing like the dove.My eyes look wearily to the height:‘O Jehovah, I am in great distress;Be my support!’15 What can I say?He has spoken to me and acted.I will walk humbly all my yearsBecause of my bitter distress.16 ‘O Jehovah, by these things every man lives,And in them is the life of my spirit.You will restore me to health and preserve me alive.17 Look! Instead of peace, I had great bitterness;But in your fondness for me,You preserved me from the pit of destruction.You have thrown all my sins behind your back.18 For the Grave cannot glorify you,Death cannot praise you.Those who go down into the pit cannot hope for your faithfulness.19 The living, the living can praise you,Just as I can this day.A father can give his sons knowledge about your faithfulness.20 O Jehovah, save me,And we will play my songs on stringed instrumentsAll the days of our life at the house of Jehovah.’”21 Isaiah then said: “Bring a cake of pressed dried figs and apply it to the boil, so that he may recover.” 22 Hez·e·kiʹah had asked: “What is the sign that I will go up to the house of Jehovah?”
39 At that time the king of Babylon, Merʹo·dach-balʹa·dan son of Balʹa·dan, sent letters and a gift to Hez·e·kiʹah, for he had heard that he had been sick and had recovered. 2 Hez·e·kiʹah gladly welcomed them and showed them his treasure-house—the silver, the gold, the balsam oil and other precious oil, his whole armory, and everything that was to be found in his treasuries. There was nothing that Hez·e·kiʹah did not show them in his own house and in all his dominion.3 After that Isaiah the prophet came in to King Hez·e·kiʹah and asked him: “What did these men say, and where did they come from?” So Hez·e·kiʹah said: “They came from a distant land, from Babylon.” 4 Next he asked: “What did they see in your house?” Hez·e·kiʹah replied: “They saw everything in my house. There was nothing that I did not show them in my treasuries.”5 Isaiah now said to Hez·e·kiʹah: “Hear the word of Jehovah of armies, 6 ‘Look! Days are coming, and all that is in your house and all that your forefathers have stored up to this day will be carried off to Babylon. Nothing will be left,’ says Jehovah. 7 ‘And some of your own sons to whom you will become father will be taken and will become court officials in the palace of the king of Babylon.’”8 At that Hez·e·kiʹah said to Isaiah: “The word of Jehovah that you have spoken is good.” Then he added: “Because there will be peace and stability during my lifetime.”
4 And seven women will grab hold of one man in that day, saying:“We will eat our own breadAnd wear our own clothing;Only let us be called by your nameTo take away our disgrace.”2 In that day what Jehovah makes sprout will be splendid and glorious, and the fruitage of the land will be the pride and beauty of the survivors of Israel. 3 Whoever remains in Zion and is left over in Jerusalem will be called holy, all of those in Jerusalem written down for life.4 When Jehovah washes away the filth of the daughters of Zion and rinses away the bloodshed of Jerusalem from her midst by the spirit of judgment and by a spirit of burning, 5 Jehovah will also create over the whole site of Mount Zion and over the place of her conventions a cloud and smoke by day and a bright flaming fire by night; for over all the glory there will be a shelter. 6 And there will be a booth for shade by day from the heat, and for refuge and protection from storms and the rain.
40 “Comfort, comfort my people,” says your God. 2 “Speak to the heart of Jerusalem,And proclaim to her that her compulsory service has been fulfilled,That her guilt has been paid off.From the hand of Jehovah she has received a full amount for all her sins.” 3 A voice of one calling out in the wilderness:“Clear up the way of Jehovah!Make a straight highway through the desert for our God. 4 Let every valley be raised up,And every mountain and hill be made low.The rough ground must become level,And the rugged ground a valley plain. 5 The glory of Jehovah will be revealed,And all flesh will see it together,For the mouth of Jehovah has spoken.” 6 Listen! Someone is saying: “Call out!”Another asks: “What should I call out?”“All flesh is green grass.All their loyal love is like the blossom of the field. 7 The green grass dries up,The blossom withers,Because the breath of Jehovah blows upon it.Surely the people are but green grass. 8 The green grass dries up,The blossom withers,But the word of our God endures forever.” 9 Go up onto a high mountain,You woman bringing good news for Zion.Raise your voice with power,You woman bringing good news for Jerusalem.Raise it, do not be afraid.Announce to the cities of Judah: “Here is your God.”10 Look! The Sovereign Lord Jehovah will come with power,And his arm will rule for him.Look! His reward is with him,And the wage he pays is before him.11 Like a shepherd he will care for his flock.With his arm he will gather together the lambs,And in his bosom he will carry them.He will gently lead those nursing their young.12 Who has measured the waters in the hollow of his handAnd taken the measurements of the heavens with a span of his hand?Who has gathered in a measure the dust of the earthOr weighed the mountains in the balancesAnd the hills in the scales?13 Who has taken the measurements of the spirit of Jehovah,And who can instruct him as his adviser?14 With whom did he consult to gain understanding,Or who teaches him in the path of justice,Or teaches him knowledge,Or shows him the way of true understanding?15 Look! The nations are like a drop from a bucket,And as the film of dust on the scales they are regarded.Look! He lifts up the islands like fine dust.16 Even Lebʹa·non is not sufficient to keep a fire burning,And its wild animals are not sufficient for a burnt offering.17 All the nations are as something nonexistent in front of him;He regards them as nothing, as an unreality.18 To whom can you compare God?What likeness can you put next to him?19 The craftsman casts an idol,The metalworker overlays it with gold,And he forges silver chains.20 He chooses a tree for his contribution,A tree that will not rot.He searches for a skilled craftsmanTo prepare a carved image that will not topple over.21 Do you not know?Have you not heard?Has it not been told to you from the beginning?Have you not understood from the foundations of the earth?22 There is One who dwells above the circle of the earth,And its inhabitants are like grasshoppers.He is stretching out the heavens like a fine gauze,And he spreads them out like a tent to dwell in.23 He reduces high officials to nothingAnd makes the judges of the earth an unreality.24 They are hardly planted,They are hardly sown,Their stem has hardly taken root in the earth,And they are blown on and dry up,And the wind carries them away like stubble.25 “To whom can you liken me to make me his equal?” says the Holy One.26 “Lift up your eyes to heaven and see.Who has created these things?It is the One who brings out their army by number;He calls them all by name.Because of his vast dynamic energy and his awe-inspiring power,Not one of them is missing.27 Why do you say, O Jacob, and why do you declare, O Israel,‘My way is hidden from Jehovah,And I receive no justice from God’?28 Do you not know? Have you not heard?Jehovah, the Creator of the ends of the earth, is a God for all eternity.He never tires out or grows weary.His understanding is unsearchable.29 He gives power to the tired oneAnd full might to those lacking strength.30 Boys will tire out and grow weary,And young men will stumble and fall,31 But those hoping in Jehovah will regain power.They will soar on wings like eagles.They will run and not grow weary;They will walk and not tire out.”
41 “Listen to me in silence, you islands;Let the nations regain their strength.Let them approach; then let them speak.Let us come together for judgment. 2 Who has raised up someone from the sunrise,Calling him in righteousness to His feet,To hand over nations to himAnd to make him subdue kings?Who reduces them to dust before his sword,Like windblown stubble before his bow? 3 He pursues them, passing along unhinderedOver paths that his feet have not traveled. 4 Who has acted and done this,Summoning the generations from the beginning?I, Jehovah, am the First One;And with the last ones I am the same.” 5 The islands have seen it and have become afraid.The ends of the earth began to tremble.They draw near and come forward. 6 Each one helps his companionAnd says to his brother: “Be strong.” 7 So the craftsman strengthens the metalworker;The one who flattens with the forge hammerStrengthens the one hammering at the anvil.He says about the soldering: “It is good.”Then it is fastened with nails so that it will not topple over. 8 “But you, O Israel, are my servant,You, O Jacob, whom I have chosen,The offspring of Abraham my friend, 9 You, whom I took from the ends of the earth,And you, whom I called from its most distant parts.I said to you, ‘You are my servant;I have chosen you; I have not rejected you.10 Do not be afraid, for I am with you.Do not be anxious, for I am your God.I will fortify you, yes, I will help you,I will really hold on to you with my right hand of righteousness.’11 Look! All those getting enraged against you will be put to shame and humiliated.Those who fight with you will be brought to nothing and perish.12 You will search for men who struggle with you, but you will not find them;The men at war with you will become as something nonexistent, as nothing at all.13 For I, Jehovah your God, am grasping your right hand,The One saying to you, ‘Do not be afraid. I will help you.’14 Do not be afraid, you worm Jacob,You men of Israel, I will help you,” declares Jehovah, your Repurchaser, the Holy One of Israel.15 “Look! I have made you a threshing sledge,A new threshing instrument with double-edged teeth.You will tread down the mountains and crush themAnd make the hills like chaff.16 You will winnow them,And the wind will carry them away;A windstorm will scatter them.You will be joyful in Jehovah,And you will boast in the Holy One of Israel.”17 “The needy and the poor are seeking water, but there is none.Their tongue is dry from thirst.I, Jehovah, will answer them.I, the God of Israel, will not abandon them.18 I will make rivers flow on the bare hillsAnd springs in the valley plains.I will turn the wilderness into a reedy pool of waterAnd the waterless land into springs of water.19 In the desert I will plant the cedar tree,The acacia and the myrtle and the pine tree.In the desert plain I will plant the juniper tree,Together with the ash and the cypress tree,20 So that all people may see and knowAnd pay attention and understandThat the hand of Jehovah has done this,And the Holy One of Israel has created it.”21 “Present your case,” says Jehovah.“Produce your arguments,” says the King of Jacob.22 “Produce evidence and tell us the things that will happen.Do tell us about the former things,So that we may reflect on them and know their outcome.Or declare to us the things that are coming.23 Tell us what will happen in the future,So that we may know that you are gods.Yes, do something, good or bad,So that we may be amazed when we see it.24 Look! You are something nonexistent,And your achievement is nothing.Anyone who chooses you is detestable.25 I have raised up someone from the north, and he will come,One from the rising of the sun who will call on my name.He will trample rulers as if they were clay,Like a potter who treads moist clay.26 Who told about this from the beginning, so that we could know,Or from times past, so that we could say, ‘He is right’?Indeed, no one announced it!No one declared it!No one heard anything from you!”27 I was the first to say to Zion: “Look! Here they are!”And to Jerusalem I will send a bearer of good news.28 But I kept looking, and there was no one;There was not one among them to give advice.And I kept asking them to reply.29 Look! All of them are a delusion.Their works are nothing.Their metal images are wind and unreality.
42 Look! My servant, whom I support!My chosen one, whom I have approved!I have put my spirit in him;He will bring justice to the nations. 2 He will not cry out or raise his voice,And he will not make his voice heard in the street. 3 No crushed reed will he break,And no smoldering wick will he extinguish.In faithfulness he will bring justice. 4 He will not grow dim or be crushed until he establishes justice in the earth;And the islands keep waiting for his law. 5 This is what the true God, Jehovah, says,The Creator of the heavens and the Grand One who stretched them out,The One who spread out the earth and its produce,The One who gives breath to the people on itAnd spirit to those who walk on it: 6 “I, Jehovah, have called you in righteousness;I have taken hold of your hand.I will safeguard you and give you as a covenant for the peopleAnd as a light of the nations, 7 For you to open the blind eyes,To bring the prisoner out of the dungeonAnd those sitting in darkness out of the prison. 8 I am Jehovah. That is my name;I give my glory to no one else,Nor my praise to graven images. 9 See, the first things have come to pass;Now I am declaring new things.Before they spring up, I tell you about them.”10 Sing to Jehovah a new song,His praise from the ends of the earth,You who go down to the sea and all that fills it,You islands and their inhabitants.11 Let the wilderness and its cities raise their voice,The settlements where Keʹdar dwells.Let the inhabitants of the crag shout joyfully;Let them cry out from the top of the mountains.12 Let them attribute glory to JehovahAnd declare his praise in the islands.13 Jehovah will go out like a mighty man.He will awaken his zeal like a warrior.He will shout, yes, he will let out a war cry;He will show himself mightier than his enemies.14 “I have kept quiet for a long time.I remained silent and restrained myself.Like a woman giving birth,I will groan, pant, and gasp all at once.15 I will devastate mountains and hillsAnd dry up all their vegetation.I will turn rivers into islandsAnd dry up reedy pools of water.16 I will lead the blind in a way that they do not knowAnd cause them to tread on unfamiliar paths.I will turn the darkness before them into lightAnd turn the rugged terrain into level land.This is what I will do for them, and I will not abandon them.”17 They will be turned back and will be utterly put to shame,Those who trust in carved images,Those who say to metal statues: “You are our gods.”18 Listen, you who are deaf;Look and see, you who are blind.19 Who is blind except my servant,So deaf as the messenger I send?Who is so blind as the one rewarded,So blind as the servant of Jehovah?20 You see many things, but you do not keep watch.You open your ears, but you do not listen.21 For the sake of his righteousness,Jehovah has taken pleasure in magnifying the law and making it glorious.22 But this is a people plundered and pillaged;All of them are trapped in the holes and hidden in the prisons.They have been plundered with no one to rescue them,And pillaged with no one to say: “Bring them back!”23 Who among you will hear this?Who will pay attention and listen for the time to come?24 Who has given Jacob for pillageAnd Israel to the plunderers?Is it not Jehovah, the One against whom we sinned?In His ways they refused to walk,And His law they would not obey.25 So He kept pouring out on him wrath,His anger and the fury of war.It consumed everything around him, but he paid no attention.It blazed up against him, but he would not take it to heart.
43 Now this is what Jehovah says,Your Creator, O Jacob, the One who formed you, O Israel:“Do not be afraid, for I have repurchased you.I have called you by your name.You belong to me. 2 When you pass through the waters, I will be with you,And through the rivers, they will not flood over you.When you walk through the fire, you will not be scorched,Nor will the flame singe you. 3 For I am Jehovah your God,The Holy One of Israel, your Savior.I have given Egypt as a ransom for you,E·thi·oʹpi·a and Seʹba in exchange for you. 4 For you became precious in my eyes,You were honored, and I have loved you.So I will give people in place of youAnd nations in exchange for your life. 5 Do not be afraid, for I am with you.I will bring your offspring from the eastAnd gather you together from the west. 6 I will say to the north, ‘Give them up!’And to the south, ‘Do not hold them back.Bring my sons from afar, and my daughters from the ends of the earth, 7 Everyone who is called by my nameAnd whom I created for my own glory,Whom I have formed and made.’ 8 Bring out a people who are blind, though they have eyes,And who are deaf, though they have ears. 9 Let all the nations assemble in one place,And let the peoples be gathered together.Who among them can tell this?Or can they cause us to hear the first things?Let them present their witnesses to prove themselves right,Or let them hear and say, ‘It is the truth!’”10 “You are my witnesses,” declares Jehovah,“Yes, my servant whom I have chosen,So that you may know and have faith in meAnd understand that I am the same One.Before me no God was formed,And after me there has been none.11 I—I am Jehovah, and besides me there is no savior.”12 “I am the One who declared and saved and made knownWhen there was no foreign god among you.So you are my witnesses,” declares Jehovah, “and I am God.13 Also, I am always the same One;And no one can snatch anything out of my hand.When I act, who can prevent it?”14 This is what Jehovah says, your Repurchaser, the Holy One of Israel:“For your sakes I will send to Babylon and bring down all the bars of the gates,And the Chal·deʹans, in their ships, will cry out in distress.15 I am Jehovah, your Holy One, the Creator of Israel, your King.”16 This is what Jehovah says,The One making a way through the seaAnd a path even through turbulent waters,17 The One who draws out the war chariot and the horse,The army together with the mighty warriors:“They will lie down and not get up.They will be extinguished, snuffed out like a burning wick.”18 “Do not remember the former things,And do not dwell on the past.19 Look! I am doing something new;Even now it is springing up.Do you not recognize it?I will make a way through the wildernessAnd rivers through the desert.20 The wild beast of the field will honor me,The jackals and the ostriches,For I provide water in the wilderness,Rivers in the desert,For my people, my chosen one, to drink,21 The people whom I formed for myselfSo that they might declare my praise.22 But you have not called on me, O Jacob,Because you grew weary of me, O Israel.23 You have not brought me sheep for your whole burnt offeringsOr glorified me with your sacrifices.I have not compelled you to bring me a gift,Nor have I made you weary by demanding frankincense.24 You did not buy me sweet cane with your money,And with the fat of your sacrifices you did not satisfy me.Instead, you have burdened me with your sinsAnd made me weary with your errors.25 I, I am the One who is blotting out your transgressions for my own sake,And I will not remember your sins.26 Remind me; let us bring our case against each other;Tell your side of it to prove you are in the right.27 Your first forefather sinned,And your own spokesmen have rebelled against me.28 So I will profane the princes of the holy place,And I will give Jacob over to destructionAnd subject Israel to insulting words.
44 “Now listen, O Jacob my servant,And you, O Israel, whom I have chosen. 2 This is what Jehovah says,Your Maker and the One who formed you,Who has helped you from the womb:‘Do not be afraid, my servant Jacob,And you, Jeshʹu·run, whom I have chosen. 3 For I will pour out water on the thirsty oneAnd flowing streams on the dry ground.I will pour out my spirit on your offspringAnd my blessing on your descendants. 4 And they will spring up as among the green grass,Like poplars by the streams of water. 5 One will say: “I belong to Jehovah.”Another will call himself by the name of Jacob,And yet another will write on his hand: “Belonging to Jehovah.”And he will adopt the name of Israel.’ 6 This is what Jehovah says,The King of Israel and his Repurchaser, Jehovah of armies:‘I am the first and I am the last.There is no God but me. 7 Who is there like me?Let him call out and tell it and prove it to me!From the time I established the people of long ago,Let them tell both the things to comeAnd what will yet happen. 8 Do not be in dread,And do not become paralyzed with fear.Have I not told each of you beforehand and declared it?You are my witnesses.Is there any God but me?No, there is no other Rock; I know of none.’” 9 All who form carved images amount to nothing,And their cherished objects will be of no benefit.As their witnesses, they see nothing and know nothing,So those who made them will be put to shame.10 Who would form a god or cast a metal imageThat can bring no benefit?11 Look! All his associates will be put to shame!The craftsmen are mere humans.Let them all assemble and take their stand.They will be terrified and be put to shame together.12 The metalsmith works the iron over the coals with his tool.He forms it with hammers,Working it with his powerful arm.Then he grows hungry and his strength fails;He drinks no water and grows tired.13 The wood-carver stretches the measuring line, tracing out the pattern with red chalk.He works it with a wood scraper and traces it with a compass.He patterns it after a man,With the beauty of a man,To sit in a house.14 There is one whose work is to cut down cedars.He selects a certain type of tree, an oak,And he lets it grow strong among the trees of the forest.He plants a laurel tree, and the rain makes it grow.15 Then it becomes fuel for a man to make fires.He takes part of it to warm himself;He builds a fire and bakes bread.But he also makes a god and worships it.He makes it into a carved image, and he bows down before it.16 Half of it he burns up in a fire;With that half he roasts the meat that he eats, and he is satisfied.He also warms himself and says:“Ah! I am warm as I watch the fire.”17 But the rest of it he makes into a god, into his carved image.He bows down to it and worships it.He prays to it and says:“Save me, for you are my god.”18 They know nothing, they understand nothing,Because their eyes are sealed shut and they cannot see,And their heart has no insight.19 No one reflects in his heartOr has knowledge or understanding, saying:“Half of it I burned up in a fire,And on its coals I baked bread and roasted meat to eat.Should I, then, make the rest of it into a detestable thing?Should I worship a block of wood from a tree?”20 He feeds on ashes.His own deluded heart has led him astray.He cannot save himself, nor does he say:“Is there not a lie in my right hand?”21 “Remember these things, O Jacob, and you, O Israel,For you are my servant.I formed you, and you are my servant.O Israel, I will not forget you.22 I will blot out your transgressions as with a cloudAnd your sins as with a thick cloud.Return to me, for I will repurchase you.23 Shout joyfully, you heavens,For Jehovah has acted!Shout in triumph, you depths of the earth!Shout for joy, you mountains,You forest, and all your trees!For Jehovah has repurchased Jacob,And on Israel he displays his splendor.”24 This is what Jehovah says, your Repurchaser,Who formed you since you were in the womb:“I am Jehovah, who made everything.I stretched out the heavens by myself,And I spread out the earth.Who was with me?25 I am frustrating the signs of the empty talkers,And I am the One who makes diviners act like fools;The One confounding the wise menAnd turning their knowledge into foolishness;26 The One making the word of his servant come trueAnd completely fulfilling the predictions of his messengers;The One saying of Jerusalem, ‘She will be inhabited,’And of the cities of Judah, ‘They will be rebuilt,And I will restore her ruins’;27 The One saying to the deep waters, ‘Be evaporated,And I will dry up all your rivers’;28 The One saying of Cyrus, ‘He is my shepherd,And he will completely carry out all my will’;The One saying of Jerusalem, ‘She will be rebuilt,’And of the temple, ‘Your foundation will be laid.’”
45 This is what Jehovah says to his anointed one, to Cyrus,Whose right hand I have taken hold ofTo subdue nations before him,To disarm kings,To open before him the double doors,So that the gates will not be shut: 2 “Before you I will go,And the hills I will level.The copper doors I will break in pieces,And the iron bars I will cut down. 3 I will give you the treasures in the darknessAnd the hidden treasures in the concealed places,So that you may know that I am Jehovah,The God of Israel, who is calling you by your name. 4 For the sake of my servant Jacob and of Israel my chosen one,I am calling you by your name.I am giving you a name of honor, although you did not know me. 5 I am Jehovah, and there is no one else.There is no God except me.I will strengthen you, although you did not know me, 6 In order that people may knowFrom the rising of the sun to its settingThat there is none besides me.I am Jehovah, and there is no one else. 7 I form light and create darkness,I make peace and create calamity;I, Jehovah, am doing all these things. 8 You heavens, rain down from above;Let the clouds pour down righteousness.Let the earth open up and be fruitful with salvation,And let it cause righteousness to spring up at the same time.I, Jehovah, have created it.” 9 Woe to the one who contends with his Maker,For he is just an earthenware fragmentAmong the other earthenware fragments lying on the ground!Should the clay say to the Potter: “What are you making?”Or should your work say: “He has no hands”?10 Woe to the one who says to a father: “What do you become father to?”And to a woman: “What are you giving birth to?”11 This is what Jehovah says, the Holy One of Israel, the One who formed him:“Would you question me about the things comingAnd command me about my sons and the works of my hands?12 I made the earth and created man on it.I stretched out the heavens with my own hands,And I give orders to all their army.”13 “I have raised up a man in righteousness,And I will make all his ways straight.He is the one who will build my cityAnd set my exiles free without a price or a bribe,” says Jehovah of armies.14 This is what Jehovah says:“The profit of Egypt and the merchandise of E·thi·oʹpi·a and the Sa·beʹans, tall of stature,Will come over to you and become yours.They will walk behind you in chains.They will come over and bow down to you.To you they will say in prayer, ‘Surely God is with you,And there is no one else; there is no other God.’”15 Truly you are a God who conceals himself,O God of Israel, the Savior.16 They will all be put to shame and be humiliated;The makers of idols will all go off in disgrace.17 But Israel will be saved by Jehovah with an everlasting salvation.You will not be put to shame or disgraced for all eternity.18 For this is what Jehovah says,The Creator of the heavens, the true God,The One who formed the earth, its Maker who firmly established it,Who did not create it simply for nothing, but formed it to be inhabited:“I am Jehovah, and there is no one else.19 I did not speak in a concealed place, in a land of darkness;I did not say to the offspring of Jacob,‘Seek me simply for nothing.’I am Jehovah, who speaks what is righteous and declares what is upright.20 Gather together and come.Approach together, you escapees from the nations.They know nothing, those who carry around carved imagesAnd pray to a god that cannot save them.21 Make your report, present your case.Let them consult together in unity.Who foretold this long agoAnd declared it from times past?Is it not I, Jehovah?There is no other God but me;A righteous God and a Savior, there is none besides me.22 Turn to me and be saved, all the ends of the earth,For I am God, and there is no one else.23 By myself I have sworn;The word has gone out of my mouth in righteousness,And it will not return:To me every knee will bend,Every tongue will swear loyalty24 And say, ‘Surely in Jehovah are true righteousness and strength.All those enraged against him will come before him in shame.25 In Jehovah all the offspring of Israel will prove to be right,And in him they will make their boast.’”
46 Bel bends down, Neʹbo stoops over.Their idols are loaded on animals, on beasts of burden,Like baggage that burdens the weary animals. 2 They stoop and bend down together;They cannot rescue the loads,And they themselves go into captivity. 3 “Listen to me, O house of Jacob, and all you who remain of the house of Israel,You whom I have supported from birth and carried from the womb. 4 Until you grow old I will be the same;Until your hair is gray I will keep bearing you.As I have done, I will carry you and bear you and rescue you. 5 To whom will you liken me or make me equal or compare me,So that we should resemble each other? 6 There are those who lavish gold from their purse;They weigh out the silver on the scale.They hire a metalworker, and he makes it into a god.Then they prostrate themselves, yes, they worship it. 7 They lift it to their shoulders;They carry it and put it in its place, and it just stands there.It does not move from its place.They cry out to it, but it does not answer;It cannot rescue anyone from distress. 8 Remember this, and take courage.Take it to heart, you transgressors. 9 Remember the former things of long ago,That I am God, and there is no other.I am God, and there is no one like me.10 From the beginning I foretell the outcome,And from long ago the things that have not yet been done.I say, ‘My decision will stand,And I will do whatever I please.’11 I am calling a bird of prey from the sunrise,From a distant land the man to carry out my decision.I have spoken, and I will bring it about.I have purposed it, and I will also carry it out.12 Listen to me, you who are stubborn of heart,You who are far away from righteousness.13 I have brought my righteousness near;It is not far away,And my salvation will not delay.I will grant salvation in Zion, my splendor to Israel.”
47 Come down and sit in the dust,O virgin daughter of Babylon.Sit down on the ground where there is no throne,O daughter of the Chal·deʹans,For never again will people call you delicate and pampered. 2 Take a hand mill and grind flour.Remove your veil.Strip off your skirt, uncover your legs.Cross over the rivers. 3 Your nakedness will be uncovered.Your shame will be exposed.I will take vengeance, and no man will stand in my way. 4 “The One repurchasing us—Jehovah of armies is his name—Is the Holy One of Israel.” 5 Sit there silently and go into darkness,O daughter of the Chal·deʹans;No more will they call you Mistress of Kingdoms. 6 I grew indignant at my people.I profaned my inheritance,And I gave them into your hand.But you showed them no mercy.Even on the elderly you placed a heavy yoke. 7 You said: “I will always be the Mistress, forever.”You did not take these things to heart;You did not consider how the matter would end. 8 Now hear this, O lover of pleasure,Who sits in security, who says in her heart:“I am the one, and there is no one else.I will not become a widow.I will never know the loss of children.” 9 But these two things will come upon you suddenly, in one day:Loss of children and widowhood.In full measure they will come upon youBecause of your many sorceries and all your powerful spells.10 You trusted in your wickedness.You said: “No one sees me.”Your wisdom and knowledge are what led you astray,And you say in your heart: “I am the one, and there is no one else.”11 But calamity will come upon you,And none of your charms will stop it.Adversity will befall you; you will not be able to avert it.Sudden ruin will come upon you like you have never known.12 Go ahead, then, with your spells and your many sorceries,With which you have toiled from your youth.Perhaps you may be able to benefit;Perhaps you may strike people with awe.13 You have grown weary with the multitude of your advisers.Let them stand up now and save you,Those who worship the heavens, who gaze at the stars,Those giving out knowledge at the new moonsAbout the things that will come upon you.14 Look! They are like stubble.A fire will burn them up.They cannot save themselves from the power of the flame.These are not charcoals for keeping warm,And this is not a fire to sit in front of.15 So your charmers will become to you,Those with whom you toiled from your youth.They will wander, each one in his own direction.There will be no one to save you.
48 Hear this, O house of Jacob,You who call yourselves by the name of IsraelAnd who have come from the waters of Judah,You who swear by the name of JehovahAnd who call on the God of Israel,Though not in truth and righteousness. 2 For they call themselves after the holy cityAnd seek the support of the God of Israel,Whose name is Jehovah of armies. 3 “The former things I told you long ago.From my own mouth they went out,And I made them known.Suddenly I took action, and they came about. 4 Because I knew how stubborn you are—That your neck is an iron sinew and your forehead is copper— 5 I told you long ago.Before it came about, I caused you to hear it,So that you could not say, ‘My idol did this;My carved image and my metal image commanded this.’ 6 You have heard and seen all of this.Will you not declare it?From now on I am announcing new things to you,Guarded secrets that you have not known. 7 Only now are they being created, and not long ago,Things that you never heard before today,So that you cannot say, ‘Look! I already know them.’ 8 No, you have not heard, you have not known,And in the past your ears were not opened.For I know that you are very treacherous,And you have been called a transgressor from birth. 9 But for the sake of my name I will hold back my anger;For my own praise I will restrain myself toward you,And I will not do away with you.10 Look! I have refined you, but not in the form of silver.I have tested you in the smelting furnace of affliction.11 For my own sake, for my own sake I will act,For how could I let myself be profaned?I give my glory to no one else.12 Listen to me, O Jacob, and Israel, whom I have called.I am the same One. I am the first; I am also the last.13 My own hand laid the foundation of the earth,And my right hand spread out the heavens.When I call to them, they stand up together.14 Gather together, all of you, and listen.Who among them has announced these things?Jehovah has loved him.He will carry out his delight against Babylon,And his arm will come against the Chal·deʹans.15 I myself have spoken, and I have called him.I have brought him, and his way will be successful.16 Come near to me, and hear this.From the very start I have not spoken in secret.From the time it happened I was there.”And now the Sovereign Lord Jehovah has sent me, and his spirit.17 This is what Jehovah says, your Repurchaser, the Holy One of Israel:“I, Jehovah, am your God,The One teaching you to benefit yourself,The One guiding you in the way you should walk.18 If only you would pay attention to my commandments!Then your peace would become just like a riverAnd your righteousness like the waves of the sea.19 Your offspring would be as many as the sandAnd your descendants as its grains.Their name would never be cut off or annihilated from before me.”20 Go out from Babylon!Flee from the Chal·deʹans!Announce it with a joyful cry! Proclaim it!Make it known to the ends of the earth.Say: “Jehovah has repurchased his servant Jacob.21 They did not become thirsty when he led them through devastated places.He caused water to flow out of the rock for them;He split a rock and made water gush out.”22 “There is no peace,” says Jehovah, “for the wicked.”
49 Listen to me, you islands,And pay attention, you faraway nations.Jehovah has called me before I was born.From the time I was in my mother’s womb he has made mention of my name. 2 He made my mouth like a sharp sword;He has hidden me in the shadow of his hand.He made me a polished arrow;He concealed me in his quiver. 3 He said to me: “You are my servant, O Israel,Through whom I will show my splendor.” 4 But I said: “I have toiled for nothing.I used up my strength for an unreality, in vain.But surely my judgment is with Jehovah,And my wages with my God.” 5 And now Jehovah, the One who formed me from the womb as his servant,Has said for me to bring Jacob back to him,So that Israel may be gathered to him.I will be glorified in the eyes of Jehovah,And my God will have become my strength. 6 And he said: “It is not enough that you are my servantTo raise up the tribes of JacobAnd to bring back those who were preserved of Israel.I have also given you as a light of nations,So that my salvation may reach the ends of the earth.”7 This is what Jehovah, the Repurchaser of Israel, his Holy One, says to the one who is despised, to the one who is detested by the nation, to the servant of rulers:“Kings will see and rise up,And princes will bow downBecause of Jehovah, who is faithful,The Holy One of Israel, who has chosen you.” 8 This is what Jehovah says:“In a time of favor I answered you,And in a day of salvation I helped you;I kept safeguarding you to give you as a covenant for the people,To rehabilitate the land,To cause them to possess their desolate inheritances, 9 To say to the prisoners, ‘Come out!’And to those in the darkness, ‘Show yourselves!’By the roadways they will feed,Along all the worn paths will be their pastures.10 They will not go hungry, nor will they thirst,Nor will scorching heat or the sun beat down on them.For the One who has mercy on them will lead them,And he will guide them by the springs of water.11 I will make all my mountains into a road,And my highways will be raised up.12 Look! These are coming from far away,And look! these from the north and from the west,And these from the land of Siʹnim.”13 Shout for joy, you heavens, and rejoice, you earth.Let the mountains become cheerful with a joyful cry.For Jehovah has comforted his people,And he shows mercy to his own afflicted ones.14 But Zion kept saying:“Jehovah has abandoned me, and Jehovah has forgotten me.”15 Can a woman forget her nursing childOr have no compassion for the son of her womb?Even if these women forget, I would never forget you.16 Look! On my palms I have engraved you.Your walls are always before me.17 Your sons hurry back.Those who tore you down and devastated you will depart from you.18 Raise your eyes and look all around.They are all gathering together.They are coming to you.“As surely as I am living,” declares Jehovah,“You will clothe yourself with all of them as with ornaments,And you will fasten them on yourself as a bride does.19 Although your places were devastated and desolate and your land was in ruins,Now it will become too cramped for those dwelling there,And those who swallowed you down will be far away.20 The sons born when you were bereaved will say in your hearing,‘This place is too cramped for me.Make room for me to dwell here.’21 And you will say in your heart,‘Who has fathered these for me,Since I am a woman bereaved of children and barren,Exiled and taken prisoner?Who has raised these?Look! I was left all alone,So where have these come from?’”22 This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says:“Look! I will raise up my hand to the nations,And I will lift up my signal to the peoples.They will bring your sons in their armsAnd carry your daughters on their shoulders.23 Kings will become caretakers for you,And their princesses will be your nurses.They will bow down to you with their faces to the groundAnd lick the dust of your feet,And you will have to know that I am Jehovah;Those hoping in me will not be put to shame.”24 Can those already captured be taken from a mighty man,Or can the captives of the tyrant be rescued?25 But this is what Jehovah says:“Even the captives of a mighty man will be taken away,And those captured by the tyrant will be rescued.I will oppose those who oppose you,And I will save your own sons.26 I will make those who mistreat you eat their own flesh,And as with sweet wine, they will become drunk with their own blood.And all people will have to know that I am Jehovah,Your Savior and your Repurchaser,The Powerful One of Jacob.”
5 Let me sing, please, to my belovedA song about my loved one and his vineyard.My beloved had a vineyard on a fruitful hillside. 2 He dug it up and rid it of stones.He planted it with a choice red vine,Built a tower in the middle of it,And hewed out a winepress in it.Then he kept hoping for it to produce grapes,But it produced only wild grapes. 3 “And now, you inhabitants of Jerusalem and men of Judah,Please judge between me and my vineyard. 4 What more could I have done for my vineyardThat I have not already done?Why, when I hoped for grapes,Did it produce only wild grapes? 5 Now, please, let me tell youWhat I will do to my vineyard:I will remove its hedge,And it will be burned down.I will break down its stone wall,And it will be trampled on. 6 I will make it a wasteland;It will not be pruned or hoed.It will be overgrown with thornbushes and weeds,And I will command the clouds not to send any rain on it. 7 For the vineyard of Jehovah of armies is the house of Israel;The men of Judah are the plantation he was fond of.He kept hoping for justice,But look! there was injustice;For righteousness,But look! a cry of distress.” 8 Woe to those who join one house to another houseAnd who annex one field to another fieldUntil there is no more roomAnd you live by yourselves on the land! 9 Jehovah of armies has sworn in my earsThat many houses, though great and beautiful,Will become an object of horror,Without an inhabitant.10 For ten acres of vineyard will produce but one bath measure,And a hoʹmer measure of seed will produce only an eʹphah.11 Woe to those who get up early in the morning to drink alcohol,Who linger late into the evening darkness until wine inflames them!12 They have harp and stringed instrument,Tambourine, flute, and wine at their feasts;But they do not consider the activity of Jehovah,And they do not see the work of his hands.13 So my people will go into exileFor lack of knowledge;Their glorious men will go hungry,And all their people will be parched with thirst.14 So the Grave has enlarged itselfAnd has opened its mouth wide without limit;And her splendor, her noisy multitudes, and her revelersWill certainly go down into it.15 And man will bow down,Man will be brought low,And the eyes of the haughty will be brought low.16 Jehovah of armies will be exalted by his judgment;The true God, the Holy One, will sanctify himself through righteousness.17 And the lambs will graze as in their pasture;Foreign residents will feed on the desolate places of well-fed animals.18 Woe to those who drag along their guilt with ropes of deceptionAnd their sin with wagon cords;19 Those who say: “Let Him speed up his work;Let it come quickly that we may see it.Let the purpose of the Holy One of Israel take placeThat we may know it!”20 Woe to those who say that good is bad and bad is good,Those who substitute darkness for light and light for darkness,Those who put bitter for sweet and sweet for bitter!21 Woe to those wise in their own eyesAnd discreet in their own sight!22 Woe to those who are mighty in drinking wineAnd to the men who are masters at mixing alcoholic drinks,23 Those who acquit the wicked for a bribeAnd who deny justice to the righteous!24 Therefore, just as the tongue of fire consumes the stubbleAnd dry grass shrivels in the flames,Their very roots will rot,And their blossoms will scatter like powder,Because they rejected the law of Jehovah of armiesAnd disrespected the word of the Holy One of Israel.25 That is why the anger of Jehovah burns against his people,And he will stretch out his hand against them and strike them.The mountains will quake,And their corpses will be like refuse in the streets.In view of all this, his anger has not turned back,But his hand is still stretched out to strike.26 He has raised up a signal to a distant nation;He has whistled for them to come from the ends of the earth;And look! they are coming very swiftly.27 None among them are tired or stumbling.No one is drowsy or sleeps.The belt around their waist is not loosened,Nor are their sandal laces broken.28 All their arrows are sharp,And all their bows are bent.The hooves of their horses are like flint,And their wheels like a storm wind.29 Their roaring is like that of a lion;They roar like young lions.They will growl and seize the preyAnd carry it off with no one to rescue it.30 In that day they will growl over itLike the growling of the sea.Anyone who gazes at the land will see distressing darkness;Even the light has grown dark because of the clouds.
50 This is what Jehovah says:“Where is the divorce certificate of your mother, whom I sent away?Or to which of my creditors did I sell you?Look! It was because of your own errors you were sold,And because of your own transgressions your mother was sent away. 2 Why, then, was no one here when I came?Why did no one answer when I called?Is my hand too short to redeem,Or is there no power in me to rescue?Look! With my rebuke I dry up the sea;I make rivers a desert.Their fish rot for lack of water,And they die because of thirst. 3 I clothe the heavens with gloom,And I make sackcloth their covering.” 4 The Sovereign Lord Jehovah has given me the tongue of those taught,So that I may know how to answer the tired one with the right word.He awakens me morning by morning;He awakens my ear to listen like the taught ones. 5 The Sovereign Lord Jehovah has opened my ear,And I was not rebellious.I did not turn in the opposite direction. 6 I offered my back to those striking meAnd my cheeks to those who plucked them bare.I did not hide my face from humiliating things and from spit. 7 But the Sovereign Lord Jehovah will help me.That is why I will not feel humiliated.That is why I have set my face like a flint,And I know that I will not be put to shame. 8 The One who declares me righteous is near.Who can accuse me?Let us stand up together.Who has a case against me?Let him approach me. 9 Look! The Sovereign Lord Jehovah will help me.Who will pronounce me guilty?Look! They will all wear out like a garment.A moth will eat them up.10 Who among you fears JehovahAnd listens to the voice of his servant?Who has walked in deep darkness, without any brightness?Let him trust in the name of Jehovah and support himself on his God.11 “Look! All of you who are igniting a fire,Making sparks fly,Walk in the light of your fire,Among the sparks you have set ablaze.This is what you will have from my hand:In sheer pain you will lie down.
51 “Listen to me, you who are pursuing righteousness,You who are seeking Jehovah.Look to the rock from which you were hewnAnd to the quarry from which you were dug. 2 Look to Abraham your fatherAnd to Sarah who gave birth to you.For he was only one when I called him,And I blessed him and made him many. 3 For Jehovah will comfort Zion.He will bring comfort to all her ruins,And he will make her wilderness like EʹdenAnd her desert plain like the garden of Jehovah.Exultation and rejoicing will be found in her,Thanksgiving and melodious song. 4 Pay attention to me, O my people,And give ear to me, my nation.For a law will go out from me,And my justice I will establish as a light to the peoples. 5 My righteousness draws near.My salvation will go out,And my arms will judge the peoples.In me the islands will hope,And for my arm they will wait. 6 Raise your eyes to the heavens,And look at the earth below.For the heavens will disperse in fragments like smoke;The earth will wear out like a garment,And its inhabitants will die like gnats.But my salvation will be eternal,And my righteousness will never fail. 7 Listen to me, you who know righteousness,The people with my law in their heart.Do not be afraid of the taunts of mortal men,And do not be terrified because of their insults. 8 For a moth will eat them up just like a garment;The clothes moth will devour them like wool.But my righteousness will last forever,And my salvation for all generations.” 9 Awake! Awake! Clothe yourself with strength,O arm of Jehovah!Awake as in the days of long ago, as in past generations.Was it not you who broke Raʹhab to pieces,Who pierced the sea monster?10 Are you not the one who dried up the sea, the waters of the vast deep?The one who made the depths of the sea a roadway for the repurchased ones to cross?11 The redeemed ones of Jehovah will return.They will come to Zion with a joyful cry,And unending joy will crown them.Exultation and rejoicing will be theirs,And grief and sighing will flee away.12 “I myself am the One comforting you.Why should you be afraid of a mortal man who will dieAnd of a son of man who will wither like green grass?13 Why do you forget Jehovah your Maker,The One who stretched out the heavens and laid the foundation of the earth?And all day long you were in constant fear of the rage of the oppressor,As though he were in a position to bring you to ruin.Where, now, is the rage of the oppressor?14 The one bent over in chains will soon be set free;He will not die and go into the pit,Nor will his bread be lacking.15 But I am Jehovah your God,Who stirs up the sea and makes its waves boisterous—Jehovah of armies is his name.16 I will put my words in your mouth,And with the shadow of my hand I will cover you,In order to plant the heavens and to lay the foundation of the earthAnd to say to Zion, ‘You are my people.’17 Awake! Awake! Rise up, O Jerusalem,You who have drunk from the hand of Jehovah his cup of wrath.You have drunk the goblet;You have drained out the cup causing staggering.18 Not one of all the sons whom she bore is there to guide her,And not one of all the sons whom she raised has taken hold of her hand.19 These two things have befallen you.Who will sympathize with you?Destruction and devastation, hunger and sword!Who will comfort you?20 Your sons have fainted.They lie down at every street cornerLike wild sheep in the net.They are full of the wrath of Jehovah, the rebuke of your God.”21 So please listen to this,O woman afflicted and drunk, though not with wine.22 This is what your Lord Jehovah says, your God who defends his people:“Look! I will take from your hand the cup causing staggering,The goblet, my cup of wrath;You will never drink it again.23 I will put it into the hand of your tormentors,Those who said to you, ‘Bow down so that we may walk over you!’So you made your back like the ground,Like a street for them to walk on.”
52 Awake! Awake! Clothe yourself with strength, O Zion!Put on your beautiful garments, O Jerusalem, the holy city!For no more will the uncircumcised and unclean one enter into you. 2 Shake off the dust, rise and take a seat, O Jerusalem.Loosen the bonds on your neck, O captive daughter of Zion. 3 For this is what Jehovah says:“You were sold for nothing,And without money you will be repurchased.” 4 For this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says:“At first my people went down to Egypt to live there as foreigners;Then As·syrʹi·a oppressed them without cause.” 5 “What, then, should I do here?” declares Jehovah.“For my people were taken for nothing.Those ruling over them keep howling in triumph,” declares Jehovah,“And constantly, all day long, my name is treated with disrespect. 6 For that reason my people will know my name;For that reason they will know in that day that I am the One speaking.Look, it is I!” 7 How beautiful on the mountains are the feet of the one bringing good news,The one proclaiming peace,The one bringing good news of something better,The one proclaiming salvation,The one saying to Zion: “Your God has become King!” 8 Listen! Your watchmen raise their voice.In unison they shout joyfully,For they will see it clearly when Jehovah gathers back Zion. 9 Become cheerful, shout joyfully in unison, you ruins of Jerusalem,For Jehovah has comforted his people; he has repurchased Jerusalem.10 Jehovah has bared his holy arm before the eyes of all the nations;All the ends of the earth will see the acts of salvation of our God.11 Turn away, turn away, get out of there, touch nothing unclean!Get out from the midst of her, keep yourselves clean,You who are carrying the utensils of Jehovah.12 For you will not depart in panic,Nor will you have to flee,For Jehovah will go ahead of you,And the God of Israel will be your rear guard.13 Look! My servant will act with insight.He will be raised up high,He will be elevated and greatly exalted.14 Just as there were many who stared at him in amazement—For his appearance was disfigured more than that of any other manAnd his stately form more than that of mankind—15 So he will startle many nations.Kings will shut their mouths before him,Because they will see what they had not been toldAnd give consideration to what they had not heard.
53 Who has put faith in the thing heard from us?And as for the arm of Jehovah, to whom has it been revealed? 2 He will come up like a twig before him, like a root out of parched land.No stately form does he have, nor any splendor;And when we see him, his appearance does not draw us to him. 3 He was despised and was avoided by men,A man who was meant for pains and was familiar with sickness.It was as if his face were hidden from us.He was despised, and we held him as of no account. 4 Truly he himself carried our sicknesses,And he bore our pains.But we considered him as plagued, stricken by God and afflicted. 5 But he was pierced for our transgression;He was crushed for our errors.He bore the punishment for our peace,And because of his wounds we were healed. 6 Like sheep we have all wandered about,Each has turned his own way,And Jehovah has caused the error of us all to meet up with him. 7 He was oppressed and he let himself be afflicted,But he would not open his mouth.He was brought like a sheep to the slaughter,Like a ewe that is silent before its shearers,And he would not open his mouth. 8 Because of restraint and judgment he was taken away;And who will concern himself with the details of his generation?For he was cut off from the land of the living;Because of the transgression of my people he received the stroke. 9 And he was given a burial place with the wicked,And with the rich in his death,Although he had done no wrongAnd there was no deception in his mouth.10 But it was Jehovah’s will to crush him, and he let him become sick.If you will present his life as a guilt offering,He will see his offspring, he will prolong his days,And through him the delight of Jehovah will have success.11 Because of his anguish, he will see and be satisfied.By means of his knowledge the righteous one, my servant,Will bring a righteous standing to many people,And their errors he will bear.12 For that reason I will assign him a portion among the many,And he will apportion the spoil with the mighty,Because he poured out his life even to deathAnd was counted among the transgressors;He carried the sin of many people,And he interceded for the transgressors.
54 “Shout joyfully, you barren woman who has not given birth!Become cheerful and cry out for joy, you who never had birth pains,For the sons of the desolate one are more numerousThan the sons of the woman with a husband,” says Jehovah. 2 “Make the place of your tent more spacious.Stretch out the tent cloths of your grand tabernacle.Do not hold back, lengthen your tent cords,And make your tent pins strong. 3 For you will spread out to the right and to the left.Your offspring will take possession of nations,And they will inhabit the desolated cities. 4 Do not be afraid, for you will not be put to shame;And do not feel humiliated, for you will not be disappointed.For you will forget the shame of your youth,And the disgrace of your widowhood you will remember no more.” 5 “For your Grand Maker is as your husband,Jehovah of armies is his name,And the Holy One of Israel is your Repurchaser.He will be called the God of the whole earth. 6 For Jehovah called you as if you were an abandoned wife and grief-stricken,Like a wife married in youth and then rejected,” says your God. 7 “For a brief moment I abandoned you,But with great mercy I will gather you back. 8 In a flood of indignation I hid my face from you for a moment,But with everlasting loyal love I will have mercy on you,” says your Repurchaser, Jehovah. 9 “This is like the days of Noah to me.Just as I have sworn that the waters of Noah will no more cover the earth,So I swear that I will no more become indignant toward you or rebuke you.10 For the mountains may be removedAnd the hills may be shaken,But my loyal love will not be removed from you,Nor will my covenant of peace be shaken,” says Jehovah, the One having mercy on you.11 “O afflicted woman, storm-tossed, uncomforted,I am laying your stones with hard mortarAnd your foundation with sapphires.12 I will make your battlements of rubies,Your gates of sparkling stones,And all your boundaries of precious stones.13 And all your sons will be taught by Jehovah,And the peace of your sons will be abundant.14 You will be firmly established in righteousness.You will be far removed from oppression,You will fear nothing and have no cause for terror,For it will not come near you.15 If anyone should attack you,It will not be at my orders.Whoever makes an attack on you will fall because of you.”16 “Look! I myself created the craftsman,Who blows on the charcoal fire,And his work produces a weapon.I myself also created the destructive man to bring ruin.17 No weapon formed against you will have any success,And you will condemn any tongue that rises up against you in the judgment.This is the heritage of the servants of Jehovah,And their righteousness is from me,” declares Jehovah.
55 Come, all you thirsty ones, come to the water!You with no money, come, buy and eat!Yes, come, buy wine and milk without money and without cost. 2 Why do you keep paying out money for what is not bread,And why spend your earnings for what brings no satisfaction?Listen intently to me, and eat what is good,And you will find great delight in what is truly rich. 3 Incline your ear and come to me.Listen, and you will keep alive,And I will readily make with you an everlasting covenantIn harmony with the expressions of loyal love to David, which are faithful. 4 Look! I made him a witness to the nations,A leader and commander to the nations. 5 Look! You will call a nation that you do not know,And those of a nation who have not known you will run to youFor the sake of Jehovah your God, the Holy One of Israel,Because he will glorify you. 6 Search for Jehovah while he may be found.Call to him while he is near. 7 Let the wicked man leave his wayAnd the evil man his thoughts;Let him return to Jehovah, who will have mercy on him,To our God, for he will forgive in a large way. 8 “For my thoughts are not your thoughts,And your ways are not my ways,” declares Jehovah. 9 “For as the heavens are higher than the earth,So my ways are higher than your waysAnd my thoughts than your thoughts.10 For just as the rain and the snow pour down from heavenAnd do not return there until they saturate the earth, making it produce and sprout,Giving seed to the sower and bread to the eater,11 So my word that goes out of my mouth will be.It will not return to me without results,But it will certainly accomplish whatever is my delight,And it will have sure success in what I send it to do.12 For you will go out with rejoicing,And in peace you will be brought back.The mountains and the hills will become cheerful before you with a joyful cry,And the trees of the field will all clap their hands.13 Instead of thornbushes the juniper tree will grow,And instead of the stinging nettle the myrtle tree will grow.And it will bring fame to Jehovah,An everlasting sign that will never perish.”
56 This is what Jehovah says:“Uphold justice, and do what is righteous,For my salvation will soon comeAnd my righteousness will be revealed. 2 Happy is the man who does thisAnd the son of man who holds fast to it,Who keeps the Sabbath and does not profane itAnd who holds his hand back from any kind of evil. 3 The foreigner who joins himself to Jehovah should not say,‘Jehovah will surely separate me from his people.’And the eunuch should not say, ‘Look! I am a dried-up tree.’”4 For this is what Jehovah says to the eunuchs who keep my sabbaths and who choose what I delight in and who hold fast to my covenant: 5 “I will give to them in my house and within my walls a monument and a name,Something better than sons and daughters.An everlasting name I will give them,One that will not perish. 6 As for the foreigners who join themselves to Jehovah to minister to him,To love the name of JehovahAnd to be his servants,All those who keep the Sabbath and do not profane itAnd who hold fast to my covenant, 7 I will also bring them to my holy mountainAnd make them rejoice inside my house of prayer.Their whole burnt offerings and their sacrifices will be accepted on my altar.For my house will be called a house of prayer for all the peoples.”8 The Sovereign Lord Jehovah, who is gathering the dispersed ones of Israel, declares:“I will gather to him others besides those already gathered.” 9 All you wild animals of the field, come to eat,All you wild animals in the forest.10 His watchmen are blind, none of them have taken note.All of them are speechless dogs, unable to bark.They are panting and lying down; they love to slumber.11 They are dogs with a voracious appetite;They are never satisfied.They are shepherds who have no understanding.They have all gone their own way;Every last one of them seeks his own dishonest gain and says:12 “Come, let me take some wine,And let us drink our fill of alcohol.And tomorrow will be like today, only far better!”
57 The righteous one has perished,But no one takes it to heart.Loyal men are taken away,With no one discerning that the righteous one has been taken awayBecause of the calamity. 2 He enters into peace.They rest on their beds, all who walk uprightly. 3 “But as for you, come closer,You sons of a sorceress,You children of an adulterer and a prostitute: 4 Whom are you making fun of?Against whom do you open your mouth wide and stick out your tongue?Are you not the children of transgression,The children of deceit, 5 Those who are inflamed with passion among big trees,Under every luxuriant tree,Who slaughter the children in the valleys,Under the clefts of the crags? 6 With the smooth stones of the valley is your portion.Yes, these are your lot.Even to them you pour out drink offerings and offer gifts.Should I be satisfied with these things? 7 On a mountain high and lofty you prepared your bed,And you went up there to offer sacrifice. 8 Behind the door and the doorpost you set up your memorial.You left me and uncovered yourself;You went up and made your bed spacious.And you made a covenant with them.You loved sharing their bed,And you gazed at the male organ. 9 You went down to Melʹech with oilAnd with an abundance of perfume.You sent your envoys far off,So that you descended to the Grave.10 You have toiled in following your many ways,But you did not say, ‘It is hopeless!’You found renewed strength.That is why you do not give up.11 Whom did you dread and fearSo that you started to lie?You did not remember me.You took nothing to heart.Have I not kept silent and withdrawn?So you showed no fear of me.12 I will make known your ‘righteousness’ and your works,And they will not benefit you.13 When you cry for help,Your collection of idols will not rescue you.A wind will carry all of them away,A mere breath will blow them away,But the one who takes refuge in me will inherit the landAnd will take possession of my holy mountain.14 It will be said, ‘Build up, build up a road! Prepare the way!Remove any obstacle from the way of my people.’”15 For this is what the High and Lofty One says,Who lives forever and whose name is holy:“I reside in the high and holy place,But also with those crushed and lowly in spirit,To revive the spirit of the lowlyAnd to revive the heart of those being crushed.16 For I will not oppose them foreverOr always remain indignant;For a man’s spirit would grow feeble because of me,Even the breathing creatures that I have made.17 I was indignant at his sinful pursuit of dishonest gain,So I struck him, I hid my face, and I was indignant.But he kept walking as a renegade, following the way of his heart.18 I have seen his ways,But I will heal him and lead himAnd restore comfort to him and to his mourning ones.”19 “I am creating the fruit of the lips.Continuous peace will be given to the one who is far away and the one who is near,” says Jehovah,“And I will heal him.”20 “But the wicked are like the restless sea that cannot calm down,And its waters keep tossing up seaweed and mire.21 There is no peace,” says my God, “for the wicked.”
58 “Call out full-throated; do not hold back!Raise your voice like a horn.Proclaim to my people their revolt,To the house of Jacob their sins. 2 They seek me day after day,And they express delight to know my ways,As if they were a nation that had practiced righteousnessAnd had not abandoned the justice of their God.They ask me for righteous judgments,Delighting to draw close to God: 3 ‘Why do you not see when we fast?And why do you not notice when we afflict ourselves?’Because on the day of your fast, you pursue your own interests,And you oppress your laborers. 4 Your fasting ends in quarrels and fights,And you strike with the fist of wickedness.You cannot fast as you do today and have your voice heard in heaven. 5 Should the fast that I choose be like this,As a day for someone to afflict himself,To bow down his head like a rush,To make his bed on sackcloth and ashes?Is this what you call a fast and a day pleasing to Jehovah? 6 No, this is the fast that I choose:To remove the fetters of wickedness,To untie the bands of the yoke bar,To let the oppressed go free,And to break in half every yoke bar; 7 It is to share your bread with the hungry,To bring the poor and homeless into your house,To clothe someone naked when you see him,And not to turn your back on your own flesh. 8 Then your light will shine through like the dawn,And your healing will spring up quickly.Your righteousness will go before you,And the glory of Jehovah will be your rear guard. 9 Then you will call, and Jehovah will answer;You will cry for help, and he will say, ‘Here I am!’If you remove from among you the yoke barAnd stop pointing your finger and speaking maliciously,10 If you grant to the hungry what you yourself desireAnd satisfy those who are afflicted,Then your light will shine even in the darkness,And your gloom will be like midday.11 Jehovah will always lead youAnd satisfy you even in a parched land;He will invigorate your bones,And you will become like a well-watered garden,Like a spring whose waters never fail.12 They will rebuild ancient ruins on your account,And you will restore the foundations of past generations.You will be called the repairer of the broken walls,The restorer of roadways by which to dwell.13 If because of the Sabbath you refrain from pursuing your own interests on my holy dayAnd you call the Sabbath an exquisite delight, a holy day of Jehovah, a day to be glorified,And you glorify it rather than pursuing your own interests and speaking idle words,14 Then you will find your exquisite delight in Jehovah,And I will make you ride on the high places of the earth.I will cause you to eat from the inheritance of Jacob your forefather,For the mouth of Jehovah has spoken.”
59 Look! The hand of Jehovah is not too short to save,Nor is his ear too dull to hear. 2 No, your own errors have separated you from your God.Your sins have made him hide his face from you,And he refuses to hear you. 3 For your palms are polluted with bloodAnd your fingers with error.Your lips speak lies, and your tongue mutters unrighteousness. 4 No one calls out for righteousness,And no one goes to court in truthfulness.They trust in unreality and speak what is worthless.They conceive trouble and give birth to what is harmful. 5 They hatch the eggs of a poisonous snake,And they weave the cobweb of a spider.Anyone who eats their eggs would die,And the egg that is crushed hatches a viper. 6 Their cobweb will not serve as a garment,Nor will they cover themselves with what they make.Their works are harmful,And deeds of violence are in their hands. 7 Their feet run to do evil,And they hurry to shed innocent blood.Their thoughts are harmful thoughts;Ruin and misery are in their ways. 8 They have not known the way of peace,And there is no justice in their tracks.They make their roadways crooked;No one treading on them will know peace. 9 That is why justice is far away from us,And righteousness does not overtake us.We keep hoping for light, but look! there is darkness;For brightness, but we keep walking in gloom.10 We grope for the wall like blind men;Like those without eyes we keep groping.We stumble at high noon as in evening darkness;Among the strong we are just like the dead.11 We all keep growling like bearsAnd cooing mournfully like doves.We hope for justice, but there is none;For salvation, but it is far away from us.12 For our revolts are many before you;Each of our sins testifies against us.For our revolts are with us;We well know our errors.13 We have transgressed and denied Jehovah;We have turned our backs on our God.We have spoken of oppression and revolt;We have conceived lies and muttered false words from the heart.14 Justice is driven back,And righteousness stands far off;For truth has stumbled in the public square,And what is upright is unable to enter.15 Truth has vanished,And anyone who turns away from bad is plundered.Jehovah saw this and was displeased,For there was no justice.16 He saw that there was no man,And he was astonished that no one interceded,So his own arm brought about salvation,And his own righteousness supported him.17 Then he put on righteousness like a coat of mailAnd the helmet of salvation on his head.He put on the garments of vengeance as his clothingAnd wrapped himself with zeal like a coat.18 He will reward them for what they have done:Wrath to his adversaries, retribution to his enemies.And to the islands he will repay their due.19 From the sunset they will fear the name of JehovahAnd from the sunrise his glory,For he will come in like a rushing river,Which the spirit of Jehovah drives along.20 “To Zion the Repurchaser will come,To those in Jacob who turn from transgression,” declares Jehovah.21 “As for me, this is my covenant with them,” says Jehovah. “My spirit that is on you and my words that I have placed in your mouth—they will not be removed from your mouth, from the mouth of your children, or from the mouth of your grandchildren,” says Jehovah, “from now on and forever.”
6 In the year that King Uz·ziʹah died, I saw Jehovah sitting on a lofty and elevated throne, and the skirts of his robe filled the temple. 2 Seraphs were standing above him; each had six wings. Each covered his face with two and covered his feet with two, and each of them would fly about with two. 3 And one called to the other:“Holy, holy, holy is Jehovah of armies.The whole earth is filled with his glory.”4 And the pivots of the thresholds quivered at the sound of the shouting, and the house was filled with smoke. 5 Then I said: “Woe to me!I am as good as dead,For I am a man of unclean lips,And I live among a people of unclean lips;For my eyes have seen the King, Jehovah of armies himself!”6 At that, one of the seraphs flew to me, and in his hand was a glowing coal that he had taken with tongs from the altar. 7 He touched my mouth and said:“Look! This has touched your lips.Your guilt is removed,And your sin is atoned for.”8 Then I heard the voice of Jehovah saying: “Whom shall I send, and who will go for us?” And I said: “Here I am! Send me!” 9 And he replied, “Go, and say to this people:‘You will hear again and again,But you will not understand;You will see again and again,But you will not get any knowledge.’10 Make the heart of this people unreceptive,Make their ears unresponsive,And paste their eyes together,So that they may not see with their eyesAnd hear with their ears,So that their heart may not understandAnd they may not turn back and be healed.”11 At this I said: “How long, O Jehovah?” Then he said:“Until the cities crash in ruins without an inhabitantAnd the houses are without peopleAnd the land is ruined and desolate;12 Until Jehovah removes men far awayAnd the deserted condition of the land becomes very extensive.13 “But there will still be a tenth in it, and it will again be burned, like a big tree and like an oak, which after they are cut down leave a stump; a holy seed will be its stump.”
60 “Arise, O woman, shed light, for your light has come.The glory of Jehovah shines on you. 2 For look! darkness will cover the earthAnd thick gloom the nations;But on you Jehovah will shine,And on you his glory will be seen. 3 Nations will go to your lightAnd kings to your shining splendor. 4 Raise your eyes and look all around you!They have all been assembled; they are coming to you.From far away your sons keep coming,And your daughters being supported on the hip. 5 At that time you will see and become radiant,And your heart will throb and overflow,Because the wealth of the sea will be directed to you;The resources of the nations will come to you. 6 Throngs of camels will cover your land,Young male camels of Midʹi·an and Eʹphah.All those from Sheʹba—they will come;Gold and frankincense they will carry.They will proclaim the praises of Jehovah. 7 All the flocks of Keʹdar will be gathered to you.The rams of Ne·baʹioth will serve you.They will come on my altar with approval,And I will beautify my glorious house. 8 Who are these that fly along like clouds,Like doves to their dovecotes? 9 For in me the islands will hope;The ships of Tarʹshish are in the lead,To bring your sons from far away,Along with their silver and their gold,To the name of Jehovah your God and to the Holy One of Israel,For he will glorify you.10 Foreigners will build your walls,And their kings will minister to you,For in my indignation I struck you,But in my favor I will have mercy on you.11 Your gates will be kept open constantly;They will not be closed by day or by night,To bring to you the resources of the nations,And their kings will take the lead.12 For any nation and any kingdom that will not serve you will perish,And the nations will be utterly devastated.13 To you the glory of Lebʹa·non will come,The juniper tree, the ash tree, and the cypress together,To beautify the place of my sanctuary;I will glorify the place for my feet.14 The sons of those who oppressed you will come and bow down before you;All those treating you disrespectfully must bow down at your feet,And they will have to call you the city of Jehovah,Zion of the Holy One of Israel.15 Instead of your being abandoned and hated, with nobody passing through,I will make you a source of everlasting pride,A cause for rejoicing throughout all generations.16 And you will actually drink the milk of nations,At the breast of kings you will nurse;And you will certainly know that I, Jehovah, am your Savior,And the Powerful One of Jacob is your Repurchaser.17 Instead of the copper I will bring in gold,And instead of the iron I will bring in silver,Instead of the wood, copper,And instead of the stones, iron;And I will appoint peace as your overseersAnd righteousness as your task assigners.18 No more will violence be heard in your landOr destruction and ruin within your boundaries.And you will call your walls Salvation and your gates Praise.19 For you the sun will no longer be a light by day,Nor will the shining of the moon give you light,For Jehovah will become to you an eternal light,And your God will be your beauty.20 No more will your sun set,Nor will your moon wane,For Jehovah will become for you an eternal light,And the days of your mourning will have ended.21 And all your people will be righteous;They will possess the land forever.They are the sprout that I planted,The work of my hands, for me to be beautified.22 The little one will become a thousandAnd the small one a mighty nation.I myself, Jehovah, will speed it up in its own time.”
61 The spirit of the Sovereign Lord Jehovah is upon me,Because Jehovah anointed me to declare good news to the meek.He sent me to bind up the brokenhearted,To proclaim liberty to the captivesAnd the wide opening of the eyes to the prisoners, 2 To proclaim the year of Jehovah’s goodwillAnd the day of vengeance of our God,To comfort all who mourn, 3 To provide for those mourning over Zion,To give them a headdress instead of ashes,The oil of exultation instead of mourning,The garment of praise instead of a despondent spirit.And they will be called big trees of righteousness,The planting of Jehovah, in order to glorify him. 4 They will rebuild the ancient ruins;They will raise up the desolated places of the past,And they will restore the devastated cities,The places that lay desolate for generation after generation. 5 “Strangers will stand and shepherd your flocks,And foreigners will be your farmers and your vinedressers. 6 As for you, you will be called the priests of Jehovah;They will call you the ministers of our God.You will eat the resources of the nations,And about their glory you will boast. 7 Instead of shame you will have a double portion,And instead of humiliation they will shout joyfully over their share.Yes, they will possess a double portion in their land.Everlasting rejoicing will be theirs. 8 For I, Jehovah, love justice;I hate robbery and unrighteousness.I will faithfully give them their wages,And I will make an everlasting covenant with them. 9 Their offspring will be known among the nationsAnd their descendants among the peoples.All who see them will recognize them,That they are the offspring whom Jehovah has blessed.”10 I will greatly exult in Jehovah.My whole being will rejoice in my God.For he has clothed me with the garments of salvation;He has wrapped me with the robe of righteousness,Just like a bridegroom who wears a turban like that of a priest,And like a bride who adorns herself with her ornaments.11 For as the earth brings forth its sproutsAnd as the garden makes what is sown in it sprout,So will the Sovereign Lord JehovahCause righteousness and praise to sprout before all the nations.
62 For the sake of Zion I will not keep silent,And for the sake of Jerusalem I will not keep stillUntil her righteousness shines like a bright lightAnd her salvation burns like a torch. 2 “The nations will see your righteousness, O woman,And all kings your glory.And you will be called by a new name,Which Jehovah’s own mouth will designate. 3 You will become a crown of beauty in the hand of Jehovah,A royal turban in the palm of your God. 4 No more will you be called an abandoned woman,And your land will no longer be called desolate.But you will be called My Delight Is in Her,And your land will be called the Married One.For Jehovah will take delight in you,And your land will be as one married. 5 For just as a young man marries a virgin,Your sons will marry you.With the rejoicing of a bridegroom over a bride,Your God will rejoice over you. 6 Upon your walls, O Jerusalem, I have commissioned watchmen.Continuously, all day long and all night long, they should not be silent.You who make mention of Jehovah,Do not rest, 7 And do not give him any rest until he firmly establishes Jerusalem,Yes, until he makes her the praise of the earth.” 8 Jehovah has sworn an oath with his right hand, with his strong arm:“I will no longer give your grain as food to your enemies,Nor will foreigners drink your new wine, for which you have toiled. 9 But those gathering it will eat it and they will praise Jehovah;And those collecting it will drink it in my holy courtyards.”10 Pass through, pass through the gates.Clear the way for the people.Build up, build up the highway.Rid it of stones.Raise up a signal for the peoples.11 Look! Jehovah has proclaimed to the ends of the earth:“Say to the daughter of Zion,‘Look! Your salvation is coming.Look! His reward is with him,And the wage he pays is before him.’”12 They will be called the holy people, those repurchased by Jehovah,And you will be called Sought After, a City Not Abandoned.
63 Who is this coming from Eʹdom,From Bozʹrah with bright-colored garments,This one with splendid clothing,Marching in his great power?“It is I, the One speaking in righteousness,The One with great power to save.” 2 Why is your clothing red,And why are your garments like those of one treading the winepress? 3 “I have trodden the wine trough alone.No one from the peoples was with me.I kept treading them in my anger,And I kept trampling them in my wrath.My garments were spattered with their blood,And I have stained all my clothing. 4 For the day of vengeance is in my heart,And the year of my repurchased ones has come. 5 I looked, but there was no one to help;I was appalled that no one offered support.So my arm brought me salvation,And my own wrath supported me. 6 I trampled peoples in my anger,I made them drunk with my wrathAnd poured out their blood on the ground.” 7 I will mention Jehovah’s acts of loyal love,The praiseworthy acts of Jehovah,Because of all that Jehovah has done for us,The many good things he has done for the house of Israel,According to his mercy and his great loyal love. 8 For he said: “Surely they are my people, sons who will not be disloyal.”So he became their Savior. 9 During all their distress it was distressing to him.And his own personal messenger saved them.In his love and compassion he repurchased them,And he lifted them up and carried them all the days of old.10 But they rebelled and grieved his holy spirit.He then turned into their enemy,And he fought against them.11 And they remembered the days of old,The days of Moses his servant:“Where is the One who brought them up out of the sea with the shepherds of his flock?Where is the One who put within him His holy spirit,12 The One who made His glorious arm go with the right hand of Moses,The One who split the waters before themTo make an everlasting name for himself,13 The One who made them walk through the surging waters,So that they walked without stumbling,Like a horse in the open country?14 Just like livestock when they go down into the valley plain,The spirit of Jehovah made them rest.”This is how you led your people,To make a majestic name for yourself.15 Look down from heaven and seeFrom your lofty abode of holiness and glory.Where are your zeal and your mightiness,The stirring of your compassions and your mercy?They are withheld from me.16 For you are our Father;Although Abraham may not know usAnd Israel may not recognize us,You, O Jehovah, are our Father.Our Repurchaser of long ago is your name.17 Why do you, O Jehovah, let us wander from your ways?Why do you let our hearts become hard, so that we do not fear you?Return, for the sake of your servants,The tribes of your inheritance.18 Your holy people possessed it for a short time.Our adversaries have trampled on your sanctuary.19 For too long we have become like those you never ruled over,Like those never called by your name.
64 If only you had ripped the heavens apart and come down,So that the mountains would quake because of you, 2 As when a fire ignites the brushwood,And the fire makes the water boil,Then your name would be known to your adversaries,And the nations would tremble before you! 3 When you did awe-inspiring things that we dared not hope for,You came down, and the mountains quaked before you. 4 From of old no one has heard or given ear,Nor has any eye seen a God except you,Who acts in behalf of those who keep in expectation of him. 5 You have met up with those who joyfully do what is right,Those who remember you and follow your ways.Look! You became indignant, while we kept sinning,We did so for a long time.Should we now be saved? 6 And we have all become like someone unclean,And all our acts of righteousness are like a menstrual cloth.We will all wither like a leaf,And our errors will carry us off like the wind. 7 There is no one calling on your name,No one who stirs himself to take hold of you,For you have hidden your face from us,And you cause us to waste away because of our error. 8 But now, O Jehovah, you are our Father.We are the clay, and you are our Potter;We are all the work of your hand. 9 Do not become too indignant, O Jehovah,And do not remember our error forever.Look at us, please, for we are all your people.10 Your holy cities have become a wilderness.Zion has become a wilderness,Jerusalem a wasteland.11 Our house of holiness and glory,Where our forefathers praised you,Has been burned with fire,And all the things we cherished lie in ruins.12 In view of this, will you still restrain yourself, O Jehovah?Will you remain silent and let us be afflicted so severely?
65 “I have let myself be searched for by those who did not ask for me;I have let myself be found by those who did not look for me.I said, ‘Here I am, here I am!’ to a nation that was not calling on my name. 2 I have spread out my hands all day long to a stubborn people,To those walking in the way that is not good,Following their own thoughts; 3 A people who constantly offend me to my face,Sacrificing in gardens and making sacrificial smoke on bricks. 4 They sit among graves,And they pass the night in hidden places,Eating the flesh of pigs,And the broth of foul things is in their vessels. 5 They say, ‘Keep to yourself; do not approach me,For I am holier than you.’These are a smoke in my nostrils, a fire burning all day long. 6 Look! It is written before me;I will not stand still,But I will repay them,I will repay them in full measure 7 For their errors and for the errors of their forefathers as well,” says Jehovah.“Because they have made sacrificial smoke on the mountainsAnd have reproached me on the hills,I will first measure out their wages in full.” 8 This is what Jehovah says:“Just as when new wine is found in a cluster of grapesAnd someone says, ‘Do not destroy it, for there is some good in it,’So I will do for the sake of my servants;I will not destroy them all. 9 I will bring out of Jacob an offspringAnd out of Judah the one to inherit my mountains;My chosen ones will take possession of it,And my servants will reside there.10 Sharʹon will become a pasture for sheepAnd the Valley of Aʹchor a resting-place for cattle,For my people who search for me.11 But you are among those forsaking Jehovah,Those forgetting my holy mountain,Those setting a table for the god of Good Luck,And those filling up cups of mixed wine for the god of Destiny.12 So I will destine you for the sword,And all of you will bow down to be slaughtered,Because I called, but you did not answer,I spoke, but you did not listen;You kept doing what was bad in my eyes,And you chose what displeased me.”13 Therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says:“Look! My servants will eat, but you will go hungry.Look! My servants will drink, but you will go thirsty.Look! My servants will rejoice, but you will suffer shame.14 Look! My servants will shout joyfully because of the good condition of the heart,But you will cry out because of the pain of heartAnd you will wail because of a broken spirit.15 You will leave behind a name that my chosen ones will use as a curse,And the Sovereign Lord Jehovah will put each of you to death,But his own servants he will call by another name;16 So that anyone who seeks a blessing for himself in the earthWill be blessed by the God of truth,And anyone who swears an oath in the earthWill swear by the God of truth.For the former distresses will be forgotten;They will be concealed from my eyes.17 For look! I am creating new heavens and a new earth;And the former things will not be called to mind,Nor will they come up into the heart.18 So exult and be joyful forever in what I am creating.For look! I am creating Jerusalem a cause for joyAnd her people a cause for exultation.19 And I will rejoice in Jerusalem and exult in my people;No more will there be heard in her the sound of weeping or a cry of distress.”20 “No more will there be an infant from that place who lives but a few days,Nor an old man who fails to live out his days.For anyone who dies at a hundred will be considered a mere boy,And the sinner will be cursed, even though he is a hundred years of age.21 They will build houses and live in them,And they will plant vineyards and eat their fruitage.22 They will not build for someone else to inhabit,Nor will they plant for others to eat.For the days of my people will be like the days of a tree,And the work of their hands my chosen ones will enjoy to the full.23 They will not toil for nothing,Nor will they bear children for distress,Because they are the offspring made up of those blessed by Jehovah,And their descendants with them.24 Even before they call out, I will answer;While they are yet speaking, I will hear.25 The wolf and the lamb will feed together,The lion will eat straw just like the bull,And the serpent’s food will be dust.They will do no harm nor cause any ruin in all my holy mountain,” says Jehovah.
66 This is what Jehovah says:“The heavens are my throne, and the earth is my footstool.Where, then, is the house that you could build for me,And where is my resting-place?” 2 “My own hand has made all these things,And this is how they all came to be,” declares Jehovah.“To this one, then, I will look,To the one humble and broken in spirit who trembles at my word. 3 The one slaughtering the bull is like one striking down a man.The one sacrificing a sheep is like one breaking the neck of a dog.The one offering a gift—like the blood of a pig!The one presenting a memorial offering of frankincense is like one saying a blessing with magical words.They have chosen their own ways,And they take delight in what is disgusting. 4 So I will choose ways to punish them,And the very things they dread I will bring upon them.Because when I called, no one answered;When I spoke, there were none who listened.They kept doing what was bad in my eyes,And they chose to do what displeased me.” 5 Hear the word of Jehovah, you who tremble at his word:“Your brothers who hate you and exclude you because of my name said, ‘May Jehovah be glorified!’But He will appear and bring you joy,And they are the ones who will be put to shame.” 6 There is a sound of uproar from the city, a sound from the temple!It is the sound of Jehovah repaying his enemies what they deserve. 7 Before she went into labor, she gave birth.Before birth pangs came to her, she delivered a male child. 8 Who has ever heard of such a thing?Who has seen such things?Will a land be brought to birth in one day?Or will a nation be born all at once?Yet, as soon as Zion went into labor, she gave birth to her sons. 9 “Will I bring it to the point of birth and then not bring it forth?” says Jehovah.“Or would I cause the birth and then shut the womb?” says your God.10 Rejoice with Jerusalem and be joyful with her, all you who love her.Exult greatly with her, all you who are in mourning over her,11 For you will nurse and be fully satisfied from her breast of consolation,And you will drink deeply and find delight in the abundance of her glory.12 For this is what Jehovah says:“Here I am extending to her peace just like a riverAnd the glory of nations like a flooding torrent.You will nurse and be carried on the hip,And you will be bounced on the knees.13 As a mother comforts her son,So I will keep comforting you;And over Jerusalem you will be comforted.14 You will see this, and your heart will rejoice,Your bones will flourish just like new grass.And the hand of Jehovah will become known to his servants,But he will denounce his enemies.”15 “For Jehovah will come as a fire,And his chariots are like a storm wind,To repay in furious anger,To rebuke with flames of fire.16 For with fire Jehovah will execute judgment,Yes, with his sword, against all flesh;And the slain of Jehovah will be many.17 “Those sanctifying themselves and cleansing themselves to enter the gardens following one who is in the center, those eating the flesh of pigs and loathsome things and mice, they will all come to their end together,” declares Jehovah. 18 “Since I know about their works and their thoughts, I am coming to gather people of all nations and languages, and they will come and see my glory.”19 “I will set a sign among them, and I will send some of those who escape to the nations—to Tarʹshish, Pul, and Lud, those who draw the bow, to Tuʹbal and Jaʹvan, and to the faraway islands—who have not heard a report about me or seen my glory; and they will proclaim my glory among the nations. 20 They will bring all your brothers out of all the nations as a gift to Jehovah, on horses, in chariots, in covered wagons, on mules, and on swift camels, up to my holy mountain, Jerusalem,” says Jehovah, “just as when the people of Israel bring their gift in a clean vessel into the house of Jehovah.”21 “I will also take some for the priests and for the Levites,” says Jehovah.22 “For just as the new heavens and the new earth that I am making will remain standing before me,” declares Jehovah, “so your offspring and your name will remain.”23 “And from new moon to new moon and from sabbath to sabbath,All flesh will come in to bow down before me,” says Jehovah.24 “And they will go out and look on the carcasses of the men who rebelled against me;For the worms on them will not die,And their fire will not be extinguished,And they will become something repulsive to all people.”
7 Now in the days of Aʹhaz son of Joʹtham son of Uz·ziʹah, the king of Judah, King Reʹzin of Syria and Peʹkah son of Rem·a·liʹah, the king of Israel, came up to wage war against Jerusalem, but he could not capture it. 2 A report was made to the house of David: “Syria has joined forces with Eʹphra·im.”And the heart of Aʹhaz and the heart of his people began to tremble, like the trees of the forest shaking in the wind.3 Jehovah then said to Isaiah: “Go out, please, to meet Aʹhaz, you and your son Sheʹar-jaʹshub, at the end of the conduit of the upper pool by the highway of the laundryman’s field. 4 You must say to him, ‘Take care to stay calm. Do not be afraid, and do not lose heart because of these two stumps of smoldering logs, because of the hot anger of Reʹzin and Syria and the son of Rem·a·liʹah. 5 For Syria with Eʹphra·im and the son of Rem·a·liʹah have plotted harm against you, saying: 6 “Let us go up against Judah and tear it apart and conquer it for ourselves, and let us appoint the son of Tabʹe·el as its king.” 7 “‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says:“It will not succeed,Nor will it take place. 8 For the head of Syria is Damascus,And the head of Damascus is Reʹzin.Within just 65 yearsEʹphra·im will be completely shattered and cease to be a people. 9 The head of Eʹphra·im is Sa·marʹi·a,And the head of Sa·marʹi·a is the son of Rem·a·liʹah.Unless you have firm faith,You will not be firmly established.”’”10 Jehovah continued speaking to Aʹhaz: 11 “Ask for a sign from Jehovah your God; it may be as deep as the Grave or as high as the sky.” 12 But Aʹhaz said: “I will not ask, nor will I put Jehovah to the test.”13 Isaiah then said: “Listen, please, O house of David. Is it not enough that you try the patience of men? Must you also try the patience of God? 14 Therefore, Jehovah himself will give you a sign: Look! The young woman will become pregnant and will give birth to a son, and she will name him Im·manʹu·el. 15 He will eat butter and honey by the time that he knows how to reject the bad and choose the good. 16 For before the boy knows how to reject the bad and choose the good, the land of the two kings whom you dread will be completely abandoned. 17 Jehovah will bring against you and against your people and against the house of your father a time such as has not come since the day Eʹphra·im broke away from Judah, for He will bring the king of As·syrʹi·a.18 “In that day Jehovah will whistle for the flies from the distant streams of the Nile of Egypt and for the bees in the land of As·syrʹi·a, 19 and they will all come and settle down on the steep valleys, on the rocky clefts, on all the thornbushes, and on all the watering places.20 “In that day by means of a hired razor from the region of the River, by means of the king of As·syrʹi·a, Jehovah will shave the head and the hair of the legs, and it will sweep away the beard as well.21 “In that day a man will keep alive a young cow of the herd and two sheep. 22 And because of the abundance of milk, he will eat butter, for everyone remaining in the land will eat butter and honey.23 “In that day wherever there used to be 1,000 vines worth 1,000 pieces of silver, there will be only thornbushes and weeds. 24 Men will go there with bow and arrow, because all the land will become thornbushes and weeds. 25 And all the mountains that used to be cleared with a hoe, you will not go near for fear of thornbushes and weeds; they will become a grazing place for bulls and a trampling ground of sheep.”
8 Jehovah said to me: “Take a large tablet and write on it with an ordinary stylus, ‘Maʹher-shalʹal-hash-baz.’ 2 And let me have it confirmed in writing by faithful witnesses, U·riʹah the priest and Zech·a·riʹah the son of Je·ber·e·chiʹah.”3 Then I had relations with the prophetess, and she became pregnant and in time gave birth to a son. Jehovah then said to me: “Name him Maʹher-shalʹal-hash-baz, 4 for before the boy knows how to call out, ‘My father!’ and ‘My mother!’ the resources of Damascus and the spoil of Sa·marʹi·a will be carried away before the king of As·syrʹi·a.”5 Jehovah spoke to me again: 6 “Because this people has rejected the gently flowing waters of the Shi·loʹahAnd they rejoice over Reʹzin and the son of Rem·a·liʹah, 7 Therefore look! Jehovah will bring against themThe mighty and vast waters of the River,The king of As·syrʹi·a and all his glory.He will come up over all his streambedsAnd overflow all his banks 8 And sweep through Judah.He will flood and pass through, reaching to the neck;His outspread wings will fill the breadth of your land,O Im·manʹu·el!” 9 Cause harm, you peoples, but you will be shattered to pieces.Listen, all you from distant parts of the earth!Prepare for battle, but you will be shattered to pieces!Prepare for battle, but you will be shattered to pieces!10 Devise a plan, but it will be thwarted!Say what you like, but it will not succeed,For God is with us!11 With his strong hand on me, this is what Jehovah said to me to warn me away from following the course of this people:12 “You should not call a conspiracy what this people calls a conspiracy!Do not fear what they fear;Do not tremble at it.13 Jehovah of armies—he is the One you should regard as holy,He is the One you should fear,And he is the One who should cause you to tremble.”14 He will become as a sanctuary,But as a stone to strike againstAnd as a rock to stumble overTo both houses of Israel,As a trap and a snareTo the inhabitants of Jerusalem.15 Many of them will stumble and fall and be broken;They will be ensnared and caught.16 Wrap up the written confirmation;Seal up the law among my disciples!17 I will keep in expectation of Jehovah, who is hiding his face from the house of Jacob, and I will hope in him.18 Look! I and the children whom Jehovah has given me are as signs and as miracles in Israel from Jehovah of armies, who resides on Mount Zion.19 And if they say to you: “Inquire of the spirit mediums or of the fortune-tellers who chirp and mutter,” is it not of their God that a people should inquire? Should they inquire of the dead in behalf of the living? 20 Instead, they should inquire of the law and of the written confirmation!When they do not speak according to this word, they have no light. 21 And each one will pass through the land afflicted and hungry; and because he is hungry and indignant, he will curse his king and his God as he looks upward. 22 Then he will look to the earth and see only distress and darkness, obscurity and hard times, gloom and no brightness.
9 However, the gloom will not be as when the land had distress, as in former times when the land of Zebʹu·lun and the land of Naphʹta·li were treated with contempt. But at a later time He will cause it to be honored—the way by the sea, in the region of the Jordan, Galʹi·lee of the nations. 2 The people who were walking in the darknessHave seen a great light.As for those dwelling in the land of deep shadow,Light has shone on them. 3 You have made the nation populous;You have made its rejoicing great.They rejoice before youAs people rejoice in the harvesttime,As those who joyfully divide up the spoil. 4 For you have shattered to pieces the yoke of their load,The rod on their shoulders, the staff of the taskmaster,As in the day of Midʹi·an. 5 Every boot that shakes the earth as it marchesAnd every garment soaked in bloodWill become fuel for the fire. 6 For a child has been born to us,A son has been given to us;And the rulership will rest on his shoulder.His name will be called Wonderful Counselor, Mighty God, Eternal Father, Prince of Peace. 7 To the increase of his rulershipAnd to peace, there will be no end,On the throne of David and on his kingdomIn order to establish it firmly and to sustain itThrough justice and righteousness,From now on and forever.The zeal of Jehovah of armies will do this. 8 Jehovah sent a word against Jacob,And it has come against Israel. 9 And all the people will know it—Eʹphra·im and the inhabitants of Sa·marʹi·a—Who say in their haughtiness and in their insolence of heart:10 “Bricks have fallen,But we will build with hewn stone.Sycamore trees have been cut down,But we will replace them with cedars.”11 Jehovah will raise up Reʹzin’s adversaries against himAnd will stir his enemies to action,12 Syria from the east and the Phi·lisʹtines from the west,They will devour Israel with open mouths.In view of all this, his anger has not turned back,But his hand is still stretched out to strike.13 For the people have not returned to the One who strikes them;They have not sought Jehovah of armies.14 Jehovah will cut off from IsraelHead and tail, shoot and rush, in one day.15 The elder and highly respected one is the head,And the prophet giving false instruction is the tail.16 Those leading this people are causing them to wander,And those who are being led are confused.17 That is why Jehovah will not rejoice over their young men,And he will have no mercy on their fatherless children and their widowsBecause all of them are apostates and evildoersAnd every mouth is speaking senselessness.In view of all this, his anger has not turned back,But his hand is still stretched out to strike.18 For wickedness burns like a fire,Consuming thornbushes and weeds.It will set fire to the thickets of the forest,And they will go up in clouds of smoke.19 In the fury of Jehovah of armiesThe land has been set on fire,And the people will become fuel for the fire.No one will spare even his brother.20 One will cut down on the rightBut still be hungry;And one will eat on the leftBut will not be satisfied.Each will devour the flesh of his own arm,21 Ma·nasʹseh will devour Eʹphra·im,And Eʹphra·im Ma·nasʹseh.Together they will be against Judah.In view of all this, his anger has not turned back,But his hand is still stretched out to strike.
1 The vision that Isaiah the son of Aʹmoz saw concerning Judah and Jerusalem in the days of Uz·ziʹah, Joʹtham, Aʹhaz, and Hez·e·kiʹah, kings of Judah: 2 Hear, O heavens, and pay attention, O earth,For Jehovah has spoken:“Sons I have brought up and raised,But they have revolted against me. 3 A bull well knows its buyer,And a donkey the manger of its owner;But Israel does not know me,My own people do not behave with understanding.” 4 Woe to the sinful nation,The people weighed down with error,A brood of wicked men, corrupt children!They have abandoned Jehovah;They have treated the Holy One of Israel with disrespect;They have turned their backs on him. 5 Where will you be struck next as you add to your rebellion?The whole head is sick,And the whole heart is diseased. 6 From the sole of the foot to the head, nothing is healthy.There are wounds and bruises and open sores—They have not been treated or bound up or softened with oil. 7 Your land is desolate.Your cities are burned with fire.Foreigners devour your land right in front of you.It is like a wasteland overthrown by foreigners. 8 The daughter of Zion has been left like a shelter in a vineyard,Like a hut in a cucumber field,Like a city under siege. 9 Unless Jehovah of armies had left us a few survivors,We should have become just like Sodʹom,And we should have resembled Go·morʹrah.10 Hear the word of Jehovah, you dictators of Sodʹom.Pay attention to the law of our God, you people of Go·morʹrah.11 “Of what benefit to me are your many sacrifices?” says Jehovah.“I have had enough of your burnt offerings of rams and the fat of well-fed animals,And I have no delight in the blood of young bulls and lambs and goats.12 When you come to appear before me,Who has required this from you,This trampling of my courtyards?13 Stop bringing in any more worthless grain offerings.Your incense is detestable to me.New moons, sabbaths, the calling of conventions—I cannot put up with the use of magical power along with your solemn assembly.14 I have hated your new moons and your festivals.They have become a burden to me;I am tired of bearing them.15 And when you spread out your palms,I hide my eyes from you.Although you offer many prayers,I am not listening;Your hands are filled with blood.16 Wash yourselves, make yourselves clean;Remove your evil deeds from my sight;Stop doing bad.17 Learn to do good, seek justice,Correct the oppressor,Defend the rights of the fatherless child,And plead the cause of the widow.”18 “Come, now, and let us set matters straight between us,” says Jehovah.“Though your sins are like scarlet,They will be made as white as snow;Though they are as red as crimson cloth,They will become like wool.19 If you show willingness and listen,You will eat the good things of the land.20 But if you refuse and rebel,You will be devoured by the sword,For the mouth of Jehovah has spoken it.”21 How the faithful city has become a prostitute!She was full of justice;Righteousness used to lodge in her,But now murderers.22 Your silver has become dross,And your beer is diluted with water.23 Your princes are stubborn and partners with thieves.Every one of them loves a bribe and chases after gifts.They do not grant justice to the fatherless,And the legal case of the widow never reaches them.24 Therefore the true Lord, Jehovah of armies,The Powerful One of Israel, declares:“Ah! I will rid myself of my adversaries,And I will take revenge on my enemies.25 I will turn my hand against you,I will smelt away your dross as with lye,And I will remove all your impurities.26 I will restore your judges as in the beginningAnd your advisers as at the start.After this you will be called City of Righteousness, Faithful Town.27 With justice Zion will be redeemed,And her people who return, with righteousness.28 The rebels and the sinners will be broken together,And those leaving Jehovah will come to their finish.29 For they will be ashamed of the mighty trees that you desired,And you will be disgraced because of the gardens that you chose.30 For you will become like a big tree with withering leaves,And like a garden without water.31 The strong man will become tow,And his work a spark;Both of them will go up in flames together,With no one to extinguish them.”
10 Hear the word that Jehovah has spoken against you, O house of Israel. 2 This is what Jehovah says:“Do not learn the way of the nations,And do not be terrified by the signs of the heavensBecause the nations are terrified by them. 3 For the customs of the peoples are a delusion.It is just a tree of the forest that is cut down,Worked by the hands of the craftsman with his tool. 4 They adorn it with silver and goldAnd fasten it with hammer and nails so that it will not fall over. 5 Like a scarecrow in a cucumber field, they cannot speak;They have to be carried, for they cannot walk.Do not fear them, for they can do no harm,Nor can they do any good.” 6 No one is like you, O Jehovah.You are great, and your name is great and mighty. 7 Who should not fear you, O King of the nations, for it is fitting;Because among all the wise ones of the nations and among all their kingdoms,There is no one at all like you. 8 They are all unreasoning and stupid.Instruction from a tree is an utter delusion. 9 Silver plates are imported from Tarʹshish and gold from Uʹphaz,The work of a craftsman, of the hands of a metalworker.Their clothing is blue thread and purple wool.They are all made by skilled workers.10 But Jehovah is truly God.He is the living God and the eternal King.Because of his indignation the earth will quake,And no nations will endure his denunciation.11 This is what you should say to them:“The gods that did not make the heavens and the earthWill perish from the earth and from under these heavens.”12 He is the Maker of the earth by his power,The One who established the productive land by his wisdomAnd who stretched out the heavens by his understanding.13 When he makes his voice heard,The waters in the heavens are in turmoil,And he causes clouds to ascend from the ends of the earth.He makes lightning for the rain,And he brings the wind out of his storehouses.14 Every man acts unreasonably and without knowledge.Every metalworker will be put to shame because of the carved image;For his metal image is a falsehood,And there is no spirit in them.15 They are a delusion, a work of mockery.When their day of reckoning comes, they will perish.16 The Share of Jacob is not like these things,For he is the One who formed everything,And Israel is the staff of his inheritance.Jehovah of armies is his name.17 Gather up your bundle from the ground,O woman dwelling under siege.18 For this is what Jehovah says:“Here I am hurling the inhabitants out of the land at this time,And I will cause them to experience distress.”19 Woe to me because of my breakdown!My wound is incurable.And I said: “Surely this is my sickness, and I must bear it.20 My tent has been devastated, and my tent cords have all been torn apart.My sons have left me and are no more.There is no one left to stretch out my tent or raise up my tent cloths.21 For the shepherds have behaved senselessly,And they have not inquired of Jehovah.That is why they have not acted with insight,And all their flocks have been scattered.”22 Listen! A report! It is coming!A great pounding from the land of the north,To make the cities of Judah desolate, a lair of jackals.23 I well know, O Jehovah, that man’s way does not belong to him.It does not belong to man who is walking even to direct his step.24 Correct me, O Jehovah, with judgment,But not in your anger, that you may not reduce me to nothing.25 Pour out your wrath on the nations who ignore youAnd on the families who do not call on your name.For they have devoured Jacob,Yes, they have devoured him to the point of extermination,And they have desolated his homeland.
11 This is the word that came to Jeremiah from Jehovah, saying: 2 “Hear the words of this covenant, you people!“Speak them to the men of Judah and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem 3 and say to them, ‘This is what Jehovah the God of Israel says: “Cursed is the man who does not obey the words of this covenant, 4 which I commanded your forefathers on the day I brought them out of the land of Egypt, out of the iron-smelting furnace, saying, ‘Obey my voice, and do all the things that I command you; and you will become my people and I will be your God, 5 so that I may fulfill the oath that I swore to your forefathers, to give them the land flowing with milk and honey, as it is this day.’”’”And I answered: “Amen, O Jehovah.”6 Jehovah then said to me: “Proclaim all these words in the cities of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem: ‘Hear the words of this covenant, and carry them out. 7 For I solemnly admonished your forefathers in the day I brought them out of the land of Egypt and to this day, admonishing them again and again: “Obey my voice.” 8 But they did not listen or incline their ear; instead, each kept stubbornly following his own wicked heart. So I brought on them all the words of this covenant that I commanded them to do, but they refused to carry them out.’”9 Jehovah then said to me: “There is a conspiracy among the men of Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem. 10 They have returned to the errors of their forefathers of old, who refused to obey my words. They too have followed other gods and have served them. The house of Israel and the house of Judah have broken my covenant that I made with their forefathers. 11 Therefore this is what Jehovah says, ‘Here I am bringing on them a calamity that they will not be able to escape. When they call to me for help, I will not listen to them. 12 Then the cities of Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem will go to the gods to which they are making sacrifices and call for help, but these will by no means save them in the time of their calamity. 13 For your gods have become as many as your cities, O Judah, and you have set up as many altars to the shameful thing as there are streets in Jerusalem, altars to make sacrifices to Baʹal.’14 “As for you, do not pray in behalf of this people. Do not cry out in their behalf or offer a prayer for them, for I will not be listening when they call out to me because of their calamity.15 What right does my beloved one have to be in my houseWhen so many have carried out evil schemes?With holy flesh will they avert the calamity when it comes upon you?Will you exult at that time?16 Jehovah once called you a thriving olive tree,Beautiful with fine fruit.With a great roaring sound, he has set her on fire,And they have broken its branches.17 “Jehovah of armies, your Planter, has declared that a calamity will come upon you because of the evil committed by the house of Israel and the house of Judah, who have offended me by making sacrifices to Baʹal.”18 Jehovah informed me so that I would know;At that time you caused me to see what they were doing.19 I was like a docile lamb being brought to the slaughter.I did not know that they were scheming against me:“Let us destroy the tree with its fruit,And let us cut him off from the land of the living,So that his name may be remembered no more.”20 But Jehovah of armies judges with righteousness;He examines the innermost thoughts and the heart.Let me see your vengeance on them,For to you I have committed my legal case.21 Therefore this is what Jehovah says against the men of Anʹa·thoth who are seeking to take your life and who say: “You must not prophesy in the name of Jehovah, or you will die by our hand”; 22 therefore this is what Jehovah of armies says: “Here I am going to call them to account. The young men will die by the sword, and their sons and their daughters will die by famine. 23 Not even a remnant will be left of them, because I will bring calamity on the men of Anʹa·thoth in the year of their being called to account.”
12 You are righteous, O Jehovah, when I make my complaint to you,When I speak about matters of justice with you.But why is the way of wicked ones successful,And why are the treacherous unworried? 2 You planted them, and they have taken root.They have grown and produced fruit.You are on their lips, but far away from their innermost thoughts. 3 But you know me well, O Jehovah, you see me;You have examined my heart and found it in union with you.Single them out like sheep for slaughtering,And set them apart for the day of killing. 4 How much longer should the land wither awayAnd the vegetation of every field dry up?Because of the evil of those dwelling in it,The beasts and the birds have been swept away.For they have said: “He does not see what will happen to us.” 5 If you get tired running with footmen,How can you run a race against horses?Even if you are confident in the land of peace,How will you fare among the dense thickets along the Jordan? 6 For even your own brothers, the household of your own father,Have dealt treacherously with you.They have raised a loud cry against you.Do not put faith in them,Even if they speak good things to you. 7 “I have abandoned my house; I have deserted my inheritance.I have given my dearly beloved one into the hand of her enemies. 8 My inheritance has become to me like a lion in the forest.She has roared against me.So I have come to hate her. 9 My inheritance is like a multicolored bird of prey to me;The other birds of prey surround it and attack it.Come, gather together, all you beasts of the field,Come to eat.10 Many shepherds have destroyed my vineyard;They have trampled my portion of land.They have turned my desirable portion of land into a desolate wilderness.11 It has become a wasteland.It has withered;It is desolate before me.The whole land has been made desolate,But no man takes it to heart.12 On all the worn paths through the wilderness the destroyers have come,For the sword of Jehovah is devouring from one end of the land to the other end.There is no peace for anyone.13 They have sown wheat, but they have reaped thorns.They have worn themselves out, but to no benefit.They will be ashamed of their produceBecause of the burning anger of Jehovah.”14 This is what Jehovah says against all my wicked neighbors, who are touching the inheritance that I caused my people Israel to possess: “Here I am uprooting them from their land, and I will uproot the house of Judah from among them. 15 But after I uproot them, I will again have mercy on them and bring each of them back to his inheritance and to his land.”16 “And if they make sure to learn the ways of my people and to swear by my name, ‘As surely as Jehovah is alive!’ just as they taught my people to swear by Baʹal, they will then be built up among my people. 17 But if they refuse to obey, I will also uproot that nation, uprooting and destroying it,” declares Jehovah.
13 This is what Jehovah told me: “Go and buy a linen belt for yourself and put it around your waist, but do not dip it in water.” 2 So I bought the belt according to the word of Jehovah and put it around my waist. 3 And the word of Jehovah came to me a second time: 4 “Take the belt that you bought and are wearing and get up, go to the Eu·phraʹtes, and hide it there in a cleft of the crag.” 5 So I went and hid it by the Eu·phraʹtes, just as Jehovah had commanded me.6 But many days later Jehovah said to me: “Get up, go to the Eu·phraʹtes, and take from there the belt that I commanded you to hide there.” 7 So I went to the Eu·phraʹtes and dug up the belt and took it from the place where I had hidden it, and I saw that the belt had been ruined; it was completely useless.8 Then the word of Jehovah came to me: 9 “This is what Jehovah says, ‘In the same way I will destroy the pride of Judah and the immense pride of Jerusalem. 10 These evil people who refuse to obey my words, who stubbornly follow their own heart, and who are following other gods, serving and bowing down to them, will become just like this belt that is completely useless.’ 11 ‘For just as a belt clings to the waist of a man, so I made the whole house of Israel and the whole house of Judah cling to me,’ declares Jehovah, ‘to become to me a people, a name, a praise, and something beautiful. But they did not obey.’12 “And you must also give this message to them, ‘This is what Jehovah the God of Israel says: “Every large jar should be filled with wine.”’ And they will reply to you, ‘Do we not already know that every large jar should be filled with wine?’ 13 Then say to them, ‘This is what Jehovah says: “Here I am filling with drunkenness all the inhabitants of this land, the kings sitting on the throne of David, the priests and the prophets, and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem. 14 And I will smash them against each other, fathers and sons alike,” declares Jehovah. “I will not show compassion or feel any sorrow or have any mercy on them; nothing will stop me from bringing them to ruin.”’15 Hear and pay attention.Do not be haughty, for Jehovah has spoken.16 Give glory to Jehovah your GodBefore he brings darknessAnd before your feet stumble on the mountains at dusk.You will hope for the light,But he will bring deep shadow;He will turn it into thick gloom.17 And if you refuse to listen,I will weep in secret because of your pride.I will shed many tears, and my eyes will stream with tears,Because the flock of Jehovah has been carried away captive.18 Tell the king and the queen mother, ‘Sit in a lower place,For your beautiful crown will fall from your head.’19 The cities of the south are shut, with no one to open them.All of Judah has been taken into exile, taken completely into exile.20 Raise your eyes and see those coming from the north.Where is the flock you were given, your beautiful sheep?21 What will you say when your punishment comesFrom your close friends whom you cultivated from the start?Will not birth pains seize you, like those of a woman giving birth?22 And when you say in your heart, ‘Why have these things befallen me?’It is because of your great error that your skirts have been stripped offAnd your heels have been treated violently.23 Can a Cushʹite change his skin, or a leopard its spots?If so, then you can do good,You who are trained to do bad.24 So I will scatter them like straw blown by the desert wind.25 This is your lot, the portion that I have measured out to you,” declares Jehovah,“Because you have forgotten me and you trust in lies.26 Therefore, I will lift up your skirts over your face,And your shame will be seen,27 Your acts of adultery and your lustful neighing,Your obscene prostitution.On the hills, in the field,I have seen your disgusting behavior.Woe to you, O Jerusalem!How much longer will you remain unclean?”
14 This is the word of Jehovah that came to Jeremiah concerning the droughts: 2 Judah mourns, and its gates have faded away.They sink to the ground dejected,And a cry goes up from Jerusalem. 3 And their masters send their servants for water.They go to the water holes and find no water.They return with their vessels empty.They are ashamed and disappointed,And they cover their heads. 4 Because the ground is cracked,For there is no rain on the land,The farmers are dismayed and cover their heads. 5 Even the doe in the field forsakes her newbornBecause there is no grass. 6 The wild donkeys stand on the bare hills.They pant for air like jackals;Their eyes fail because there is no vegetation. 7 Although our own errors testify against us,O Jehovah, act for the sake of your name.For our acts of unfaithfulness are many,And it is against you that we have sinned. 8 O hope of Israel, his Savior in times of distress,Why are you like a stranger in the land,Like a traveler who stops only to spend the night? 9 Why are you like a man who is stunned,Like a mighty man who cannot save?For you are among us, O Jehovah,And your name has been called on us.Do not abandon us.10 This is what Jehovah says concerning this people: “They love to wander about; they have not restrained their feet. So Jehovah finds no pleasure in them. Now he will remember their error and call them to account for their sins.”11 Then Jehovah said to me: “Do not pray for good to come to this people. 12 When they fast, I do not listen to their entreaties, and when they offer whole burnt offerings and grain offerings, I take no pleasure in them, for by the sword, by famine, and by pestilence, I will do away with them.”13 At this I said: “Alas, O Sovereign Lord Jehovah! Here the prophets are saying to them, ‘You will not see the sword, and famine will not come upon you, but I will give you true peace in this place.’”14 Jehovah then said to me: “The prophets are prophesying lies in my name. I have not sent them or commanded them or spoken to them. A lying vision and a worthless divination and the deceit of their own heart is what they are prophesying to you. 15 Therefore this is what Jehovah says concerning the prophets who are prophesying in my name, though I did not send them, and who say that no sword or famine will occur in this land: ‘By sword and by famine those prophets will perish. 16 And the people to whom they are prophesying will be cast out into the streets of Jerusalem because of the famine and the sword, with no one to bury them—them, their wives, their sons, or their daughters—for I will pour out on them the calamity they deserve.’17 “You must speak this word to them,‘Let my eyes stream with tears night and day, let them not cease,For the virgin daughter of my people has been completely crushed and broken,With an extremely severe wound.18 If I go out into the field and look,I see those slain by the sword!And if I come into the city,I see the diseases from the famine!For both the prophet and the priest have gone around in a land that they do not know.’”19 Have you completely rejected Judah, or have you abhorred Zion?Why have you struck us, so that there is no healing for us?There was a hope for peace, but nothing good came,For a time of healing, but there is terror!20 We acknowledge our wickedness, O Jehovah,And the error of our forefathers,For we have sinned against you.21 For the sake of your name, do not reject us;Do not despise your glorious throne.Remember, and do not break your covenant with us.22 Can any of the worthless idols of the nations give rain,Or can even the heavens send showers of rain on their own?Are you not the only One, O Jehovah our God?And we hope in you,For you alone have done all these things.
15 Then Jehovah said to me: “Even if Moses and Samuel were standing before me, I would show no favor toward this people. Drive them out from before me. Let them go. 2 And if they say to you, ‘Where should we go?’ you must say to them, ‘This is what Jehovah says:“Whoever is for deadly plague, to deadly plague!Whoever is for the sword, to the sword!Whoever is for the famine, to the famine!And whoever is for the captivity, to the captivity!”’3 “‘And I will appoint over them four calamities,’ declares Jehovah, ‘the sword to kill, the dogs to drag away, and the birds of the heavens and the beasts of the earth to devour and to destroy. 4 And I will make them an object of horror to all the kingdoms of the earth because of Ma·nasʹseh the son of Hez·e·kiʹah, the king of Judah, for what he did in Jerusalem. 5 Who will show compassion to you, O Jerusalem,Who will sympathize with you,And who will stop to ask about your welfare?’ 6 ‘You have deserted me,’ declares Jehovah.‘You keep turning your back on me.So I will stretch out my hand against you and destroy you.I am tired of feeling pity for you. 7 And I will winnow them with a fork in the gates of the land.I will bereave them of children.I will destroy my people,Since they refuse to turn back from their ways. 8 Their widows will become more numerous before me than the sand of the seas.I will bring a destroyer against them at midday, against mothers and young men.I will bring agitation and terror upon them suddenly. 9 The woman who bore seven children has grown faint;She struggles for breath.Her sun has set while it is yet day,Causing shame and humiliation.’‘And those few remaining ones of themI will give to the sword before their enemies,’ declares Jehovah.”10 Woe to me, O my mother, because you gave birth to me,A man subject to quarrel and strife with all the land.I have neither loaned nor borrowed;But all of them curse me.11 Jehovah said: “I will surely minister to you for good;I will surely intercede for you in the time of calamity,In the time of distress against the enemy.12 Can anyone break iron in pieces,Iron from the north, and copper?13 Your resources and your treasures I will give as plunder,Not for a price, but because of all your sins throughout all your territories.14 I will give them to your enemiesTo take to a land you do not know.For a fire has been ignited by my anger,And it is burning against you.”15 You know, O Jehovah,Remember me and turn your attention to me.Take vengeance on my persecutors for me.Do not let me perish because of your slowness to anger.Know that for your sake I bear this reproach.16 Your words were found, and I ate them;And your word became to me the exultation and the rejoicing of my heart,For your name has been called on me, O Jehovah God of armies.17 I do not sit in the company of merrymakers and rejoice.Because your hand is upon me, I sit alone,For you have filled me with indignation.18 Why is my pain chronic and my wound incurable?It refuses to be healed.Will you become to me like a deceptive water supplyThat cannot be relied on?19 Therefore this is what Jehovah says:“If you return, then I will restore you,And you will stand before me.If you separate what is precious from what is worthless,You will become like my own mouth.They will have to turn to you,But you will not turn to them.”20 “I am making you a fortified copper wall to this people.They will certainly fight against you,But they will not prevail against you,For I am with you, to save you and to rescue you,” declares Jehovah.21 “And I will rescue you from the hand of the wickedAnd redeem you from the palm of the ruthless.”
16 The word of Jehovah again came to me, saying: 2 “You must not take a wife for yourself, and you must not have sons and daughters in this place. 3 For this is what Jehovah says concerning the sons and daughters who are born here and concerning their mothers who give birth to them and concerning their fathers who cause their birth in this land: 4 ‘They will die of deadly diseases, but no one will mourn them or bury them; they will become like manure on the surface of the ground. They will perish by the sword and by famine, and their dead bodies will be food for the birds of the heavens and for the beasts of the earth.’ 5 For this is what Jehovah says,‘Do not enter a house where a mourners’ feast is held,And do not go to wail or offer sympathy.’‘For I have taken away my peace from this people,’ declares Jehovah,‘As well as my loyal love and mercy. 6 Both the great and the small will die in this land.They will not be buried,No one will mourn them,Nor will anyone cut himself or make himself bald for them. 7 And no one will provide food for those in mourning,To comfort them over their dead;Nor will anyone give them the cup of consolationTo drink over the loss of their father or mother. 8 And do not enter a house of feastingTo sit down with them to eat and drink.’9 “For this is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says, ‘Here in this place, in your days and before your very eyes, I will put an end to the sounds of exultation and rejoicing, the voice of the bridegroom and the voice of the bride.’10 “When you tell this people all these words, they will ask you, ‘Why has Jehovah spoken of all this great calamity against us? What error and what sin have we committed against Jehovah our God?’ 11 You must reply to them, ‘“Because your forefathers abandoned me,” declares Jehovah, “and they kept following other gods and serving them and bowing down to them. But me they abandoned, and my law they did not keep. 12 And you have behaved far worse than your forefathers, and each one of you follows the stubbornness of his wicked heart instead of obeying me. 13 So I will hurl you out of this land into a land that neither you nor your forefathers have known, and there you will have to serve other gods day and night, because I will show you no favor.”’14 “‘However, the days are coming,’ declares Jehovah, ‘when they will no longer say: “As surely as Jehovah is alive, who brought the people of Israel out of the land of Egypt!” 15 but rather: “As surely as Jehovah is alive, who brought the people of Israel from the land of the north and from all the lands to which he had dispersed them!” and I will bring them back to their land, which I gave to their forefathers.’16 ‘Here I am sending for many fishermen,’ declares Jehovah,‘And they will fish for them.After that I will send for many hunters,And they will hunt them down on every mountain and every hillAnd out of the clefts of the crags.17 For my eyes are on everything they do.They have not been hidden from before me,Nor has their error been hidden from my eyes.18 First, I will repay the full amount due for their error and their sin,For they have profaned my land with the lifeless figures of their disgusting idolsAnd have filled my inheritance with their detestable things.’”19 O Jehovah, my strength and my stronghold,My place to flee in the day of distress,To you the nations will come from the ends of the earth,And they will say: “Our forefathers inherited utter falsehood,Futility and useless things of no benefit.”20 Can a man make gods for himselfWhen they are not really gods?21 “So I will make them know,At this time I will make them know my power and my might,And they will have to know that my name is Jehovah.”
17 “The sin of Judah is written down with an iron stylus.With a diamond point it is engraved on the tablet of their heartAnd on the horns of their altars, 2 While their sons remember their altars and their sacred polesBeside a luxuriant tree, on the high hills, 3 On the mountains in the open countryside.Your resources, all your treasures, I will give as plunder—Yes, your high places because of sin throughout your territories. 4 You will forfeit, of your own accord, your inheritance that I gave you.And I will make you serve your enemies in a land you do not know,For you have kindled my anger like a fire.It will burn for all time.” 5 This is what Jehovah says:“Cursed is the man who puts his trust in mere humans,Who relies on human power,And whose heart turns away from Jehovah. 6 He will become like a solitary tree in the desert.He will not see when good comes,But he will reside in parched places in the wilderness,In a salt land where no one can live. 7 Blessed is the man who puts his trust in Jehovah,Whose confidence is in Jehovah. 8 He will become like a tree planted by the waters,That sends out its roots to the stream.He will not notice when heat comes,But his leaves will always flourish.And in the year of drought he will not be anxious,Nor will he quit producing fruit. 9 The heart is more treacherous than anything else and is desperate.Who can know it?10 I, Jehovah, am searching the heart,Examining the innermost thoughts,To give to each one according to his ways,According to the fruitage of his works.11 Like a partridge that gathers what it has not laid,So is the one who acquires riches dishonestly.They will leave him in midlife,And in the end he will prove senseless.”12 A glorious throne, exalted from the beginning,Is the place of our sanctuary.13 O Jehovah, the hope of Israel,All those who abandon you will be put to shame.Those apostatizing from you will be written in the dust,Because they have abandoned Jehovah, the source of living water.14 Heal me, O Jehovah, and I will be healed.Save me, and I will be saved,For you are the object of my praise.15 Look! There are those saying to me:“Where is the word of Jehovah?Let it come, please!”16 But as for me, I did not run away from following you as a shepherd,Nor did I long for the day of disaster.You well know everything my lips have spoken;It all took place before your face!17 Do not be a cause of terror to me.You are my refuge in the day of calamity.18 Let my persecutors be put to shame,But do not let me be put to shame.Let them be struck with terror,But do not let me be struck with terror.Bring the day of calamity on them,And crush them and destroy them completely.19 This is what Jehovah told me: “Go and stand in the gate of the sons of the people by which the kings of Judah go in and out, and in all the gates of Jerusalem. 20 You must say to them, ‘Hear the word of Jehovah, you kings of Judah, all people of Judah, and all inhabitants of Jerusalem, who enter by these gates. 21 This is what Jehovah says: “Watch yourselves, and do not carry any load on the Sabbath day or bring it in through the gates of Jerusalem. 22 You must not bring any load out of your homes on the Sabbath day; and you must do no work at all. Keep the Sabbath day sacred, just as I commanded your forefathers. 23 But they did not listen or incline their ear, and they stubbornly refused to obey or to accept discipline.”’24 “‘“However, if you strictly obey me,” declares Jehovah, “and you bring in no load through the gates of this city on the Sabbath day, and you keep the Sabbath day sacred by not doing any work on it, 25 then kings and princes who sit on the throne of David will also enter in through the gates of this city, riding in the chariot and on horses, they and their princes, the men of Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem; and this city will be inhabited for all time. 26 And people will come from the cities of Judah, from the places around Jerusalem, from the land of Benjamin, from the lowland, from the mountainous region, and from the Negʹeb, bringing whole burnt offerings, sacrifices, grain offerings, frankincense, and thanksgiving sacrifices into the house of Jehovah.27 “‘“But if you do not obey me by keeping the Sabbath day sacred and by not carrying loads and bringing them through the gates of Jerusalem on the Sabbath day, I will set her gates on fire, and it will certainly consume the fortified towers of Jerusalem and will not be extinguished.”’”
18 This is the word that came to Jeremiah from Jehovah: 2 “Rise up and go down to the house of the potter, and there I will cause you to hear my words.”3 So I went down to the house of the potter, and he was working on the potter’s wheels. 4 But the vessel that the potter was making with the clay was spoiled in his hand. So the potter reworked it into another vessel, just as he saw fit.5 Then the word of Jehovah came to me, saying: 6 “‘Can I not do to you just as this potter did, O house of Israel?’ declares Jehovah. ‘Look! As the clay in the hand of the potter, so are you in my hand, O house of Israel. 7 Whenever I may speak about uprooting and pulling down and destroying a nation or a kingdom, 8 and that nation abandons its wickedness that I spoke against, I will also change my mind concerning the calamity that I intended to bring against it. 9 But whenever I speak about building up and planting a nation or a kingdom, 10 and it does what is bad in my eyes and does not obey my voice, I will change my mind concerning the good that I intended to do for it.’11 “Now say, please, to the men of Judah and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, ‘This is what Jehovah says: “Here I am preparing a calamity and devising a scheme against you. Turn back, please, from your bad ways, and reform your ways and your practices.”’”12 But they said: “It is hopeless! For we will walk after our own thoughts, and each of us will act according to the stubbornness of his wicked heart.”13 Therefore this is what Jehovah says:“Ask for yourselves, please, among the nations.Who has heard anything like this?The virgin of Israel has done a most horrible thing.14 Does the snow of Lebʹa·non disappear from the rocks on its slopes?Or will cool waters flowing from afar dry up?15 But my people have forgotten me.For they make sacrifices to something worthless,And they make men stumble in their ways, the ancient paths,To walk on back roads that are not smooth and level,16 In order to make their land an object of horrorAnd something to whistle at forever.Every last one passing by it will stare in horror and shake his head.17 Like the east wind, I will scatter them before the enemy.I will show them my back, not my face, in the day of their disaster.”18 And they said: “Come, let us devise a plot against Jeremiah, for the law will not perish from our priests or counsel from the wise men or the word from the prophets. Come and let us speak against him and pay no attention to what he says.”19 Do pay attention to me, O Jehovah,And listen to what my opponents are saying.20 Should good be repaid with bad?For they have dug a pit for my life.Remember how I stood before you to speak good about them,To turn your wrath away from them.21 So give their sons over to the famine,And hand them over to the power of the sword.May their wives become bereaved of children and widowed.May their men be killed with deadly plague,Their young men struck down with the sword in battle.22 Let a cry be heard from their housesWhen you bring marauders on them suddenly.For they have dug a pit to capture meAnd have laid traps for my feet.23 But you, O Jehovah,Well know all their schemes against me to kill me.Do not cover their error,And do not wipe out their sin from before you.Let them stumble before youWhen you take action against them in your anger.
19 This is what Jehovah said: “Go and buy an earthenware flask from a potter. Take some of the elders of the people and some of the elders of the priests, 2 and go out to the Valley of the Son of Hinʹnom, at the entrance of the Gate of the Potsherds. And there proclaim the words that I speak to you. 3 You will say, ‘Hear the word of Jehovah, you kings of Judah and inhabitants of Jerusalem. This is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says:“‘“I am about to bring a calamity on this place, and the ears of anyone who hears about it will tingle. 4 It is because they abandoned me and made this place unrecognizable. In it they are sacrificing to other gods, whom they and their forefathers and the kings of Judah had not known, and they have filled this place with the blood of the innocent ones. 5 They built the high places of Baʹal in order to burn their sons in the fire as whole burnt offerings to Baʹal, something that I had not commanded or spoken of and that had never even come into my heart.”’6 “‘“Therefore look! the days are coming,” declares Jehovah, “when this place will no longer be called Toʹpheth or the Valley of the Son of Hinʹnom but the Valley of the Slaughter. 7 I will thwart the plans of Judah and Jerusalem in this place, and I will make them fall by the sword before their enemies and by the hand of those seeking to take their life. And I will give their dead bodies as food to the birds of the heavens and to the beasts of the earth. 8 And I will make this city an object of horror and something to whistle at. Every last one passing by it will stare in horror and whistle over all its plagues. 9 And I will make them eat the flesh of their sons and daughters, and they will each eat the flesh of his fellow man, because of the siege and their desperation when they are hemmed in by their enemies and those seeking to take their life.”’10 “Then break the flask before the eyes of the men who go with you, 11 and say to them, ‘This is what Jehovah of armies says: “This is how I will break this people and this city, like someone who breaks a potter’s vessel so that it can never be repaired; and they will bury the dead in Toʹpheth until there is no more room to bury them.”’12 “‘That is what I will do to this place,’ declares Jehovah, ‘and to its inhabitants, to make this city like Toʹpheth. 13 And the houses of Jerusalem and the houses of the kings of Judah will become unclean like this place, Toʹpheth, yes, all the houses on whose roofs they offered sacrifices to all the army of the heavens and where they poured out drink offerings to other gods.’”14 When Jeremiah returned from Toʹpheth where Jehovah sent him to prophesy, he stood in the courtyard of the house of Jehovah and said to all the people: 15 “This is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says, ‘Here I am bringing on this city and on all its towns all the calamity that I have spoken against it, because they stubbornly refused to obey my words.’”
2 The word of Jehovah came to me, saying: 2 “Go and proclaim in the ears of Jerusalem, ‘This is what Jehovah says:“I well remember the devotion of your youth,The love you showed when you were engaged to marry,How you followed me in the wilderness,In a land not sown with seed. 3 Israel was holy to Jehovah, the firstfruits of his harvest.”’‘Anyone devouring him would become guilty.Disaster would come upon them,’ declares Jehovah.” 4 Hear the word of Jehovah, O house of Jacob,And all you families of the house of Israel. 5 This is what Jehovah says:“What fault did your forefathers find in me,So that they strayed so far from me,And they walked after worthless idols and became worthless themselves? 6 They did not ask, ‘Where is Jehovah,The One who brought us out of the land of Egypt,Who led us through the wilderness,Through a land of deserts and pits,Through a land of drought and of deep shadow,Through a land where no man travelsAnd where no humans dwell?’ 7 I then brought you to a land of orchards,To eat its fruitage and its good things.But you came in and defiled my land;You made my inheritance something detestable. 8 The priests did not ask, ‘Where is Jehovah?’Those handling the Law did not know me,The shepherds rebelled against me,The prophets prophesied by Baʹal,And they followed those who could bring no benefit. 9 ‘So I will contend further with you,’ declares Jehovah,‘And I will contend with the sons of your sons.’10 ‘But cross over to the coastlands of the Kitʹtim and see.Yes, send to Keʹdar and consider carefully;See whether anything like this has happened.11 Has a nation ever changed its gods for those that are not gods?But my own people have exchanged my glory for what is useless.12 Stare in amazement at this, you heavens;Shudder in absolute horror,’ declares Jehovah,13 ‘Because my people have done two bad things:They have abandoned me, the source of living water,And dug for themselves cisterns,Broken cisterns, that cannot hold water.’14 ‘Is Israel a servant or a slave born in the household?Then why has he been given over to plunder?15 Against him young lions roar;They have raised their voice.They made his land an object of horror.His cities have been set on fire, so that there is no inhabitant.16 The people of Noph and Tahʹpan·es feed on the crown of your head.17 Have you not brought this on yourselfBy abandoning Jehovah your GodWhile he was leading you in the way?18 Now why do you wish for the way to EgyptTo drink the waters of Shiʹhor?Why do you wish for the way to As·syrʹi·aTo drink the waters of the River?19 Your wickedness should correct you,And your own unfaithfulness should reprove you.Know and realize how bad and bitter it isTo abandon Jehovah your God;You have shown no fear of me,’ declares the Sovereign Lord, Jehovah of armies.20 ‘For long ago I smashed your yokeAnd tore off your shackles.But you said: “I am not going to serve,”For on every high hill and under every luxuriant treeYou were lying sprawled out, prostituting yourself.21 I planted you as a choice red vine, all of it pure seed;So how have you turned into the degenerate shoots of a foreign vine before me?’22 ‘Though you should wash with soda and use much lye,Your guilt would still be a stain before me,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.23 How can you say, ‘I have not defiled myself.I have not followed the Baʹals’?Look at your way in the valley.Consider what you have done.You are like a swift, young she-camel,Aimlessly running back and forth in her ways,24 A wild donkey accustomed to the wilderness,Sniffing the wind in her lust.Who can restrain her when she is in heat?None of those looking for her will need to weary themselves.In her season they will find her.25 Keep your feet from going bareAnd your throat from thirst.But you said, ‘It is hopeless!No! I have fallen in love with strangers,And I will follow them.’26 Like the shame of a thief when he is caught,So the house of Israel has been put to shame,They, their kings and their princes,Their priests and their prophets.27 They say to a tree, ‘You are my father,’And to a stone, ‘You gave birth to me.’But to me they turn their back and not their face.And in the time of their calamity they will say,‘Rise up and save us!’28 Now where are your gods that you made for yourself?Let them rise up if they can save you in your time of calamity,For your gods have become as numerous as your cities, O Judah.29 ‘Why do you keep contending against me?Why have all of you rebelled against me?’ declares Jehovah.30 I have struck your sons in vain.They would accept no discipline;Your own sword devoured your prophets,Like a marauding lion.31 O generation, consider for yourselves the word of Jehovah.Have I become like a wilderness to IsraelOr a land of oppressive darkness?Why have these, my people, said, ‘We roam freely.We will come to you no more’?32 Can a virgin forget her ornaments,A bride her breastbands?And yet my own people have forgotten me for countless days.33 How skillfully, O woman, you set your course to seek love!You have trained yourself in the ways of wickedness.34 Even your skirts are stained with the blood of the innocent poor ones,Though I did not find them in the act of breaking in;It is on all your skirts.35 But you say, ‘I am innocent.Surely his anger has turned back from me.’Now I am bringing judgment against youBecause you say, ‘I have not sinned.’36 Why do you treat so lightly your unstable course?You will become ashamed of Egypt too,Just as you became ashamed of As·syrʹi·a.37 For this reason also you will go out with your hands on your head,For Jehovah has rejected those in whom you put confidence;They will not bring you success.”
20 Now Pashʹhur the son of Imʹmer, the priest, who was also the leading commissioner in the house of Jehovah, was listening when Jeremiah prophesied these things. 2 Then Pashʹhur struck Jeremiah the prophet and put him in the stocks that were at the Upper Gate of Benjamin, which was in the house of Jehovah. 3 But on the following day when Pashʹhur released Jeremiah from the stocks, Jeremiah said to him:“Jehovah has named you, not Pashʹhur, but Terror All Around. 4 For this is what Jehovah says, ‘I will make you an object of terror to yourself and to all your friends, and they will fall by the sword of their enemies while your eyes are looking on; and I will give all Judah into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he will take them into exile in Babylon and put them to death by the sword. 5 And I will give all the wealth of this city, all its resources, all its precious things, and all the treasures of the kings of Judah into the hand of their enemies. And they will plunder them and seize them and take them to Babylon. 6 And as for you, Pashʹhur, and all who live in your house, you will go into captivity. You will go off to Babylon and die there, and you will be buried there with all your friends, because you have prophesied lies to them.’” 7 You have fooled me, O Jehovah, and I was fooled.You used your strength against me, and you prevailed.I have become a laughingstock all day long;Everyone ridicules me. 8 For whenever I speak, I must cry out and proclaim,“Violence and destruction!”For me the word of Jehovah has been the cause of insults and jeering all day long. 9 So I said: “I am not going to make mention of him,And I will speak no more in his name.”But in my heart it became like a burning fire shut up in my bones,And I was tired of holding it in;I could no longer endure it.10 For I heard many evil rumors;Terror surrounded me.“Denounce him; let us denounce him!”Every man wishing me peace was watching for my downfall:“Perhaps he will make a foolish mistake,And we can prevail and take our revenge against him.”11 But Jehovah was with me like a fearsome warrior.That is why those persecuting me will stumble and will not prevail.They will be put to great shame, for they will not succeed.Their everlasting humiliation will not be forgotten.12 But you, O Jehovah of armies, are examining the righteous one;You see the innermost thoughts and the heart.Let me see your vengeance on them,For to you I have committed my legal case.13 Sing to Jehovah! Praise Jehovah!For he has rescued the poor one from the hand of evildoers.14 Cursed be the day I was born!May the day my mother gave birth to me not be blessed!15 Cursed be the man who brought good news to my father, saying:“A son has been born to you, a boy!”Making him rejoice greatly.16 May that man become like cities that Jehovah overthrew without regret.May he hear an outcry in the morning and the sound of alarm at midday.17 Why did he not put me to death in the womb,So that my mother would become my burial placeAnd her womb would always remain pregnant?18 Why did I have to come out of the wombTo see trouble and grief,To end my days in shame?
21 Jeremiah received the word from Jehovah when King Zed·e·kiʹah sent to him Pashʹhur son of Mal·chiʹjah and Zeph·a·niʹah son of Ma·a·seiʹah, the priest, requesting: 2 “Please inquire of Jehovah in our behalf, because King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon is waging war against us. Perhaps Jehovah will perform one of his wonderful works in our behalf, so that he will withdraw from us.”3 Jeremiah said to them: “This is what you should say to Zed·e·kiʹah, 4 ‘This is what Jehovah the God of Israel says: “Here I am turning around against you the weapons of war that are in your own hands, with which you are fighting the king of Babylon and the Chal·deʹans who are outside the wall besieging you. And I will gather them into the middle of this city. 5 And I myself will fight against you with an outstretched hand and a mighty arm, with anger and wrath and great indignation. 6 I will strike the inhabitants of this city, both man and beast. By a great pestilence they will die.”’7 “‘“And after that,” declares Jehovah, “I will give King Zed·e·kiʹah of Judah and his servants and the people of this city—those who survive the pestilence, the sword, and the famine—into the hand of King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon, into the hand of their enemies, and into the hand of those who are seeking to take their life. He will strike them down with the sword. He will not feel sorry for them, nor will he show compassion or have any mercy.”’8 “And to this people you should say, ‘This is what Jehovah says: “Here I am putting before you the way of life and the way of death. 9 Those who remain in this city will die by the sword, by famine, and by pestilence. But whoever goes out and surrenders to the Chal·deʹans who are besieging you will keep living, and he will have his life as a spoil.”’10 “‘“For I have set my face against this city for calamity and not for good,” declares Jehovah. “It will be given into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he will burn it with fire.”11 “‘To the household of the king of Judah: Hear the word of Jehovah. 12 O house of David, this is what Jehovah says:“Uphold justice every morning,And rescue the one being robbed from the hand of the defrauder,So that my wrath does not blaze like a fireAnd burn with no one to extinguish itBecause of your evil deeds.”’13 ‘Here I am against you, O inhabitant of the valley,O rock of the level land,’ declares Jehovah.‘As for you who say: “Who will come down against us?And who will invade our dwellings?”14 I will hold an accounting against youAs your deeds deserve,’ declares Jehovah.‘And I will set her forest ablaze,And it will consume all the things around her.’”
22 This is what Jehovah says: “Go down to the house of the king of Judah, and deliver this message. 2 You must say, ‘Hear the word of Jehovah, O king of Judah who sits on the throne of David, you with your servants and your people, those who enter through these gates. 3 This is what Jehovah says: “Uphold justice and righteousness. Rescue the one being robbed from the hand of the defrauder. Do not mistreat any foreign resident, and do not harm any fatherless child or widow. And do not shed any innocent blood in this place. 4 For if you are careful to carry out this word, then the kings who sit on the throne of David will enter through the gates of this house, riding in chariots and on horses, they with their servants and their people.”’5 “‘But if you will not obey these words, by myself I do swear,’ declares Jehovah, ‘that this house will become a devastated place.’6 “For this is what Jehovah says concerning the house of the king of Judah,‘You are as Gilʹe·ad to me,Like the summit of Lebʹa·non.But I will make you a wilderness;Not one of your cities will be inhabited. 7 And I will appoint destroyers against you,Each with his weapons.They will cut down your choicest cedarsAnd make them fall into the fire.8 “‘And many nations will pass by this city and say to one another: “Why did Jehovah do this to this great city?” 9 And they will reply: “Because they abandoned the covenant of Jehovah their God and bowed down to other gods and served them.”’10 Do not weep for the dead one,And do not sympathize with him.Instead, weep profusely for the one going away,For he will return no more to see the land of his birth.11 “For this is what Jehovah says concerning Shalʹlum son of Jo·siʹah, the king of Judah who is reigning instead of his father Jo·siʹah and who has gone out of this place: ‘He will return there no more. 12 For he will die in the place where they have taken him into exile, and he will see this land no more.’13 Woe to the one who builds his house without righteousnessAnd his upper rooms without justice,Who makes his fellow man serve him for nothing,Whose wages he refuses to pay;14 The one saying, ‘I will build for myself a roomy houseWith spacious upper rooms.I will fit it with windowsAnd panel it with cedar and paint it with vermilion.’15 Will you continue reigning because you outdo others in your use of cedar?Your father also ate and drank,But he upheld justice and righteousness,And it went well with him.16 He defended the legal claim of the afflicted one and the poor one,So that it went well.‘Is that not what it means to know me?’ declares Jehovah.17 ‘But your eyes and heart are set only on your dishonest gain,On shedding innocent blood,And on committing fraud and extortion.’18 “Therefore this is what Jehovah says concerning Je·hoiʹa·kim son of Jo·siʹah, the king of Judah,‘They will not mourn him:“Alas, my brother! Alas, my sister!”They will not mourn him:“Alas, O master! Alas, his majesty!”19 With the burial of a donkey he will be buried,Dragged about and thrown away,Outside the gates of Jerusalem.’20 Go up to Lebʹa·non and cry out,Raise your voice in Baʹshan,And cry out from Abʹa·rim,For all your passionate lovers have been crushed.21 I spoke to you when you felt secure.But you said, ‘I will not obey.’This has been your course since youth,For you have not obeyed my voice.22 A wind will shepherd all your shepherds,And your passionate lovers will go into captivity.Then you will be put to shame and humiliated because of all your calamity.23 O you who dwell in Lebʹa·non,Nestled among the cedars,How you will groan when pangs come on you,Anguish like that of a woman giving birth!”24 “‘As surely as I am alive,’ declares Jehovah, ‘even if Co·niʹah son of Je·hoiʹa·kim, the king of Judah, were the seal ring on my right hand, I would pull you off from there! 25 I will give you into the hand of those seeking to take your life, into the hand of those whom you fear, into the hand of King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon, and into the hand of the Chal·deʹans. 26 And I will hurl you and your mother who gave birth to you into another land where you were not born, and there you will die. 27 And they will never return to the land they yearn for.28 Is this man Co·niʹah just a despised, broken pot,A vessel that nobody wants?Why are he and his descendants hurled downAnd thrown into a land they do not know?’29 O earth, earth, earth, hear the word of Jehovah.30 This is what Jehovah says:‘Write down this man as childless,As a man who will not have any success during his lifetime,For none of his descendants will succeedIn sitting on David’s throne and ruling again in Judah.’”
23 “Woe to the shepherds who are destroying and scattering the sheep of my pasture!” declares Jehovah.2 Therefore this is what Jehovah the God of Israel says against the shepherds who are shepherding my people: “You have scattered my sheep; you kept dispersing them, and you have not turned your attention to them.”“So I will turn my attention to you because of your evil deeds,” declares Jehovah.3 “Then I will gather together the remnant of my sheep from all the lands to which I have dispersed them, and I will bring them back to their pasture, and they will be fruitful and become many. 4 And I will raise up over them shepherds who will really shepherd them. They will no longer be afraid or be terrified, and none will be missing,” declares Jehovah.5 “Look! The days are coming,” declares Jehovah, “when I will raise up to David a righteous sprout. And a king will reign and show insight and uphold justice and righteousness in the land. 6 In his days Judah will be saved, and Israel will reside in security. And this is the name by which he will be called: Jehovah Is Our Righteousness.”7 “However, the days are coming,” declares Jehovah, “when they will no longer say, ‘As surely as Jehovah is alive, who brought the people of Israel out of the land of Egypt!’ 8 but rather, ‘As surely as Jehovah is alive, who brought out and brought back the descendants of the house of Israel from the land of the north and from all the lands to which I had dispersed them,’ and they will dwell in their own land.”9 Concerning the prophets:My heart is broken within me.All my bones are shaking.I am like a man who is drunkAnd like a man overcome by wine,Because of Jehovah and because of his holy words.10 For the land is full of adulterers;Because of the curse the land has gone into mourningAnd the pastures of the wilderness have dried up.Their course is evil, and they abuse their power.11 “Both the prophet and the priest are polluted.Even in my own house I have found their wickedness,” declares Jehovah.12 “So their path will become slippery and dark;They will be pushed and will fall.For I will bring calamity on themIn the year of reckoning,” declares Jehovah.13 “And in the prophets of Sa·marʹi·a I have seen what is repulsive.Their prophecies are incited by Baʹal,And they lead my people Israel astray.14 And in the prophets of Jerusalem I have seen horrible things.They commit adultery and walk in falsehood;They encourage evildoers,And they do not turn away from their wickedness.To me they are all like Sodʹom,And her inhabitants are like Go·morʹrah.”15 Therefore this is what Jehovah of armies says against the prophets:“Here I am making them eat wormwoodAnd giving them poisoned water to drink.For from the prophets of Jerusalem apostasy has spread throughout the land.”16 This is what Jehovah of armies says:“Do not listen to the words of the prophets who are prophesying to you.They are deluding you.The vision they speak is from their own heart,Not from the mouth of Jehovah.17 They are saying again and again to those who disrespect me,‘Jehovah has said: “You will enjoy peace.”’And to everyone who follows his own stubborn heart they say,‘No calamity will come upon you.’18 For who has stood in the inner circle of JehovahTo see and hear his word?Who has paid attention to his word in order to hear it?19 Look! The windstorm of Jehovah will burst out in fury;Like a whirling tempest it will whirl down on the head of the wicked.20 The anger of Jehovah will not turn backUntil he has carried out and accomplished the intentions of his heart.In the final part of the days you will clearly understand this.21 I did not send the prophets, yet they ran.I did not speak to them, yet they prophesied.22 But if they had stood in my inner circle,They would have made my people hear my wordsAnd would have caused them to turn back from their bad way and their evil deeds.”23 “Am I only a God nearby,” declares Jehovah, “and not a God also from far away?”24 “Can any man hide in a concealed place where I cannot see him?” declares Jehovah.“Do I not fill the heavens and the earth?” declares Jehovah.25 “I have heard the prophets who are prophesying lies in my name say, ‘I had a dream! I had a dream!’ 26 How long will this continue in the heart of the prophets, to prophesy lies? They are prophets of the deceit of their own heart. 27 They intend to make my people forget my name by the dreams they relate to one another, just as their fathers forgot my name because of Baʹal. 28 Let the prophet who has a dream relate the dream, but the one who has my word should speak my word truthfully.”“What does the straw have in common with the grain?” declares Jehovah.29 “Is not my word just like a fire,” declares Jehovah, “and like a forge hammer that smashes the crag?”30 “So here I am against the prophets,” declares Jehovah, “who steal my words from one another.”31 “Here I am against the prophets,” declares Jehovah, “those who use their tongue to say, ‘He declares!’”32 “Here I am against the prophets of lying dreams,” declares Jehovah, “who relate them and lead my people astray because of their lies and their boasting.”“But I did not send them or command them. So they will not benefit this people at all,” declares Jehovah.33 “And when this people or a prophet or a priest asks you, ‘What is the burden of Jehovah?’ you should reply to them, ‘“You people are the burden! And I will cast you off,” declares Jehovah.’ 34 As for the prophet or the priest or the people who say, ‘This is the burden of Jehovah!’ I will turn my attention on that man and on his household. 35 This is what each of you is saying to his fellow and to his brother, ‘What has Jehovah answered? And what has Jehovah spoken?’ 36 But the burden of Jehovah you should mention no more, for the burden is each one’s own word, and you have changed the words of the living God, Jehovah of armies, our God.37 “This is what you will say to the prophet, ‘What answer has Jehovah given you? And what has Jehovah spoken? 38 And if you keep saying, “The burden of Jehovah!” this is what Jehovah says: “Because of your saying, ‘This word is the burden of Jehovah,’ after I told you, ‘You must not say: “The burden of Jehovah!”’ 39 look! I will lift you up and throw you away from my presence, both you and the city that I gave to you and your forefathers. 40 And I will bring on you everlasting disgrace and everlasting humiliation, which will not be forgotten.”’”
24 Then Jehovah showed me two baskets of figs set before the temple of Jehovah, after King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon had carried into exile Jec·o·niʹah son of Je·hoiʹa·kim, the king of Judah, along with the princes of Judah, the craftsmen, and the metalworkers; he took them from Jerusalem to Babylon. 2 One basket had very good figs, like early figs, but the other basket had very bad figs, so bad that they could not be eaten.3 Jehovah then asked me: “What do you see, Jeremiah?” So I said: “Figs; the good figs are very good, but the bad ones are very bad, so bad that they cannot be eaten.”4 Then the word of Jehovah came to me, saying: 5 “This is what Jehovah the God of Israel says, ‘Like these good figs, so I will regard in a good way the exiles of Judah, whom I have sent away from this place to the land of the Chal·deʹans. 6 I will keep my eye on them for their good, and I will cause them to return to this land. I will build them up, and I will not tear down; I will plant them, and I will not uproot. 7 And I will give them a heart to know me, that I am Jehovah. They will become my people, and I will become their God, for they will return to me with all their heart.8 “‘But concerning the bad figs that are so bad they cannot be eaten, this is what Jehovah says: “So I will regard King Zed·e·kiʹah of Judah, his princes, the remnant of Jerusalem who are left in this land, and those who are dwelling in the land of Egypt. 9 I will make them an object of horror and calamity to all the kingdoms of the earth, a reproach, a proverbial saying, a cause for ridicule, and a curse in all the places to which I disperse them. 10 And I will send against them the sword, the famine, and the pestilence, until they have perished from the land that I gave to them and to their forefathers.”’”
25 The word that came to Jeremiah concerning all the people of Judah in the fourth year of Je·hoiʹa·kim son of Jo·siʹah, the king of Judah, which was the first year of King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon. 2 This is what Jeremiah the prophet spoke concerning all the people of Judah and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem:3 “From the 13th year of Jo·siʹah son of Aʹmon, the king of Judah, to this day, these 23 years, the word of Jehovah has come to me, and I kept speaking to you again and again, but you would not listen. 4 And Jehovah sent all his servants the prophets to you, sending them again and again, but you would not listen or incline your ear to hear. 5 They would say, ‘Turn back, please, each of you from your evil ways and your evil deeds; then you will continue dwelling for a long time to come in the land that Jehovah long ago gave to you and to your forefathers. 6 Do not follow other gods and serve them and bow down to them, offending me with the work of your hands; otherwise I will bring calamity on you.’7 “‘But you would not listen to me,’ declares Jehovah. ‘Instead you offended me with the work of your hands, to your own calamity.’8 “Therefore this is what Jehovah of armies says, ‘“Because you would not obey my words, 9 I am sending for all the families of the north,” declares Jehovah, “sending for King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon, my servant, and I will bring them against this land and against its inhabitants and against all these surrounding nations. I will devote them to destruction and make them an object of horror and something to whistle at and a perpetual ruin. 10 I will put an end to the sound of exultation and the sound of rejoicing from them, the voice of the bridegroom and the voice of the bride, the sound of the hand mill and the light of the lamp. 11 And all this land will be reduced to ruins and will become an object of horror, and these nations will have to serve the king of Babylon for 70 years.”’12 “‘But when 70 years have been fulfilled, I will call to account the king of Babylon and that nation for their error,’ declares Jehovah, ‘and I will make the land of the Chal·deʹans a desolate wasteland for all time. 13 I will bring on that land all my words that I have spoken against it, all that is written in this book that Jeremiah has prophesied against all the nations. 14 For many nations and great kings will make slaves of them, and I will repay them according to their deeds and the work of their own hands.’”15 For this is what Jehovah the God of Israel said to me: “Take this cup of the wine of wrath out of my hand, and make all the nations to whom I send you drink it. 16 And they will drink and stagger and act like madmen because of the sword that I am sending among them.”17 So I took the cup out of the hand of Jehovah and made all the nations to whom Jehovah sent me drink: 18 starting with Jerusalem and the cities of Judah, her kings and her princes, to make them a ruin, an object of horror, something to whistle at and a curse, as it is today; 19 then Pharʹaoh king of Egypt and his servants, his princes, and all his people, 20 and all their mixed populations; all the kings of the land of Uz; all the kings of the land of the Phi·lisʹtines, Ashʹke·lon, Gazʹa, Ekʹron, and those remaining of Ashʹdod; 21 Eʹdom, Moʹab, and the Amʹmon·ites; 22 all the kings of Tyre, all the kings of Siʹdon, and the kings of the island in the sea; 23 Deʹdan, Teʹma, Buz, and all those with hair clipped at the temples; 24 all the kings of the Arabians and all the kings of the mixed populations who reside in the wilderness; 25 all the kings of Zimʹri, all the kings of Eʹlam, and all the kings of the Medes; 26 and all the kings of the north near and far, one after the other, and all the other kingdoms of the earth that are on the surface of the ground; and the king of Sheʹshach will drink after them.27 “And you must say to them, ‘This is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says: “Drink and get drunk and vomit and fall so that you cannot get up because of the sword that I am sending among you.”’ 28 And if they refuse to take the cup out of your hand to drink, say to them, ‘This is what Jehovah of armies says: “You must drink it! 29 For look! if I am bringing calamity first on the city that bears my name, should you go unpunished?”’“‘You will not go unpunished, for I am calling for a sword against all the inhabitants of the earth,’ declares Jehovah of armies.30 “And you are to prophesy all these words to them and say to them,‘From on high Jehovah will roar,And from his holy dwelling he will make his voice heard.He will roar loudly against his abiding place.Shouting like those treading the winepress,He will sing triumphantly against all the inhabitants of the earth.’31 ‘A noise will resound to the ends of the earth,For Jehovah has a controversy with the nations.He will personally pass judgment on all humans.And he will put the wicked to the sword,’ declares Jehovah.32 This is what Jehovah of armies says:‘Look! A calamity is spreading from nation to nation,And a great tempest will be unleashed from the remotest parts of the earth.33 “‘And those slain by Jehovah in that day will be from one end of the earth clear to the other end of the earth. They will not be mourned, nor will they be gathered up or buried. They will become like manure on the surface of the ground.’34 Wail, you shepherds, and cry out!Wallow about, you majestic ones of the flock,Because the time of your slaughter and your dispersion has come,And you will fall like a precious vessel!35 The shepherds have no place to flee,And there is no escape for the majestic ones of the flock.36 Listen! The outcry of the shepherdsAnd the wailing of the majestic ones of the flock,For Jehovah is devastating their pasture.37 And the peaceful dwelling places have been made lifelessBecause of the burning anger of Jehovah.38 He has left his lair just like a young lion,For their land has become an object of horrorBecause of the cruel swordAnd because of his burning anger.”
26 In the beginning of the reign of Je·hoiʹa·kim son of Jo·siʹah, the king of Judah, this word came from Jehovah: 2 “This is what Jehovah says, ‘Stand in the courtyard of the house of Jehovah and speak concerning all the people of the cities of Judah who are coming in to worship at the house of Jehovah. Tell them everything that I command you; do not take away a word. 3 Perhaps they will listen and each one will turn back from his evil way, and I will change my mind concerning the calamity that I intend to bring on them because of their evil deeds. 4 Say to them: “This is what Jehovah says, ‘If you will not listen to me by following my law that I have placed before you, 5 by listening to the words of my servants the prophets, whom I am sending to you again and again, whom you have not listened to, 6 then I will make this house like Shiʹloh, and I will make this city an object of cursing to all the nations of the earth.’”’”7 And the priests and the prophets and all the people heard Jeremiah speaking these words in the house of Jehovah. 8 So when Jeremiah had finished speaking all that Jehovah had commanded him to speak to all the people, then the priests and the prophets and all the people seized him and said: “You will surely die. 9 Why have you prophesied in the name of Jehovah, saying, ‘This house will become like Shiʹloh, and this city will be devastated and left without an inhabitant’?” And all the people gathered around Jeremiah in the house of Jehovah.10 When the princes of Judah heard these words, they came up from the house of the king to the house of Jehovah and sat down at the entrance of the new gate of Jehovah. 11 The priests and the prophets said to the princes and to all the people: “This man deserves the death penalty, because he has prophesied against this city just as you have heard with your own ears.”12 Jeremiah then said to all the princes and to all the people: “It was Jehovah who sent me to prophesy against this house and against this city all the words that you have heard. 13 So now, reform your ways and your actions and obey the voice of Jehovah your God, and Jehovah will change his mind concerning the calamity that he has spoken against you. 14 But as for me, I am in your hand. Do to me whatever seems good and right in your eyes. 15 Only know for certain that if you put me to death, you will bring innocent blood upon yourselves and upon this city and upon her inhabitants, for in truth Jehovah sent me to you to speak all these words in your hearing.”16 Then the princes and all the people said to the priests and the prophets: “This man does not deserve the death penalty, for he spoke to us in the name of Jehovah our God.”17 Furthermore, some of the elders of the land rose up and began saying to the entire congregation of the people: 18 “Miʹcah of Moʹresh·eth was prophesying in the days of King Hez·e·kiʹah of Judah, and he said to all the people of Judah, ‘This is what Jehovah of armies says:“Zion will be plowed up as a field,Jerusalem will become heaps of ruins,And the mountain of the House will become like high places in a forest.”’19 “Did King Hez·e·kiʹah of Judah and all Judah then put him to death? Did he not fear Jehovah and beg for Jehovah’s favor, so that Jehovah changed his mind concerning the calamity that he had spoken against them? So we are about to bring a great calamity on ourselves.20 “And there was another man prophesying in the name of Jehovah, U·riʹjah son of She·maiʹah from Kirʹi·ath-jeʹa·rim, who prophesied against this city and against this land with words like those of Jeremiah. 21 King Je·hoiʹa·kim and all his mighty men and all the princes heard his words, and the king sought to put him to death. When U·riʹjah heard of it, he at once became afraid and fled to Egypt. 22 Then King Je·hoiʹa·kim sent El·naʹthan the son of Achʹbor and other men with him to Egypt. 23 They brought U·riʹjah from Egypt and took him to King Je·hoiʹa·kim, who then struck him down with the sword and cast his dead body into the graveyard of the common people.”24 But A·hiʹkam the son of Shaʹphan supported Jeremiah, so that he was not handed over to the people to be put to death.
27 In the beginning of the reign of Je·hoiʹa·kim son of Jo·siʹah, the king of Judah, this word came to Jeremiah from Jehovah: 2 “This is what Jehovah has told me, ‘Make for yourself straps and yoke bars, and put them on your neck. 3 Then send them to the king of Eʹdom, the king of Moʹab, the king of the Amʹmon·ites, the king of Tyre, and the king of Siʹdon by the hand of the messengers who have come to Jerusalem to King Zed·e·kiʹah of Judah. 4 Give them this command for their masters:“‘“This is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says; this is what you should say to your masters, 5 ‘It is I who made the earth, mankind, and the beasts that are on the surface of the earth by my great power and by my outstretched arm; and I have given it to whomever I please. 6 And now I have given all these lands into the hand of my servant King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon; even the wild beasts of the field I have given him to serve him. 7 All the nations will serve him and his son and his grandson until the time for his own land comes, when many nations and great kings will make him their slave.’8 “‘“‘If any nation or kingdom refuses to serve King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon and refuses to put its neck under the yoke of the king of Babylon, I will punish that nation with the sword, with famine, and with pestilence,’ declares Jehovah, ‘until I have finished them off by his hand.’9 “‘“‘Therefore, do not listen to your prophets, your diviners, your dreamers, your magicians, and your sorcerers, who are saying to you: “You will not serve the king of Babylon.” 10 For they are prophesying lies to you, so that you will be taken far away from your land and I will disperse you and you will perish.11 “‘“‘But the nation that brings its neck under the yoke of the king of Babylon and serves him, I will allow to remain on its land,’ declares Jehovah, ‘to cultivate it and dwell in it.’”’”12 Also to King Zed·e·kiʹah of Judah I spoke in the same way, saying: “Bring your necks under the yoke of the king of Babylon and serve him and his people, and you will keep living. 13 Why should you and your people die by the sword, by famine, and by pestilence, as Jehovah has said about the nation that will not serve the king of Babylon? 14 Do not listen to the words of the prophets who are saying to you, ‘You will not serve the king of Babylon,’ because they are prophesying lies to you.15 “‘For I have not sent them,’ declares Jehovah, ‘but they are prophesying lies in my name, with the result that I will disperse you and you will perish, you and the prophets who are prophesying to you.’”16 And to the priests and to all this people I said: “This is what Jehovah says, ‘Do not listen to the words of your prophets who are prophesying to you: “Look! The utensils of the house of Jehovah will be brought back from Babylon very soon!” for they are prophesying lies to you. 17 Do not listen to them. Serve the king of Babylon and you will keep living. Why should this city become a ruin? 18 But if they are prophets and if the word of Jehovah is with them, please let them beg Jehovah of armies that the remaining utensils in the house of Jehovah, in the house of the king of Judah, and in Jerusalem may not be taken away to Babylon.’19 “For this is what Jehovah of armies says concerning the pillars, the Sea, the carriages, and the remaining utensils that are left in this city, 20 which King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon did not take when he took into exile Jec·o·niʹah son of Je·hoiʹa·kim, the king of Judah, from Jerusalem to Babylon, together with all the nobles of Judah and Jerusalem; 21 yes, this is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says concerning the utensils that are left at the house of Jehovah, in the house of the king of Judah, and in Jerusalem: 22 ‘“To Babylon they will be brought, and there they will remain until the day I turn my attention to them,” declares Jehovah. “Then I will bring them back and restore them to this place.”’”
28 In that same year, in the beginning of the reign of King Zed·e·kiʹah of Judah, in the fourth year, in the fifth month, the prophet Han·a·niʹah the son of Azʹzur from Gibʹe·on said to me in the house of Jehovah in the presence of the priests and all the people: 2 “This is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says, ‘I will break the yoke of the king of Babylon. 3 Within two years I am bringing back to this place all the utensils of the house of Jehovah that King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon took from this place and brought to Babylon.’” 4 “‘And I will bring back to this place Jec·o·niʹah son of Je·hoiʹa·kim, the king of Judah, and all the exiles of Judah who have gone to Babylon,’ declares Jehovah, ‘for I will break the yoke of the king of Babylon.’”5 Then Jeremiah the prophet spoke to Han·a·niʹah the prophet in the presence of the priests and all the people who were standing in the house of Jehovah. 6 Jeremiah the prophet said: “Amen! May Jehovah do this! May Jehovah fulfill your words that you prophesied by bringing back from Babylon to this place the utensils of the house of Jehovah and all the exiled people! 7 However, hear, please, this message that I am speaking in your ears and in the ears of all the people. 8 Long ago the prophets who were prior to me and prior to you used to prophesy concerning many lands and great kingdoms, about war, calamity, and pestilence. 9 If a prophet prophesies about peace and the word of that prophet comes true, then it will be known that Jehovah truly sent that prophet.”10 At that Han·a·niʹah the prophet took the yoke bar off the neck of the prophet Jeremiah and broke it. 11 Han·a·niʹah then said in the presence of all the people: “This is what Jehovah says, ‘Just like this I will break the yoke of King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon from off the neck of all the nations within two years.’” And Jeremiah the prophet went on his way.12 After Han·a·niʹah the prophet had broken the yoke bar from off the neck of Jeremiah the prophet, this message of Jehovah came to Jeremiah: 13 “Go and say to Han·a·niʹah, ‘This is what Jehovah says: “You have broken yoke bars of wood, but instead of them you will make yoke bars of iron.” 14 For this is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says: “I will put an iron yoke bar on the neck of all these nations, to serve King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon, and they must serve him. Even the wild beasts of the field I will give him.”’”15 Jeremiah the prophet then said to Han·a·niʹah the prophet: “Listen, please, O Han·a·niʹah! Jehovah has not sent you, but you have caused this people to trust in a lie. 16 Therefore this is what Jehovah says, ‘Look! I am removing you from the face of the ground. This year you will die, for you have urged rebellion against Jehovah.’”17 So Han·a·niʹah the prophet died in that year, in the seventh month.
29 These are the words of the letter that Jeremiah the prophet sent from Jerusalem to the rest of the elders among the exiled people, the priests, the prophets, and all the people, whom Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar had taken into exile from Jerusalem to Babylon, 2 after King Jec·o·niʹah, the queen mother, the court officials, the princes of Judah and Jerusalem, and the craftsmen and the metalworkers had gone out of Jerusalem. 3 He sent the letter by the hand of El·aʹsah the son of Shaʹphan and Gem·a·riʹah the son of Hil·kiʹah, whom King Zed·e·kiʹah of Judah sent to Babylon to King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon. It said:4 “This is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says to all the exiled people, whom I have caused to go into exile from Jerusalem to Babylon, 5 ‘Build houses and live in them. Plant gardens and eat their fruit. 6 Take wives and have sons and daughters; take wives for your sons and give your daughters in marriage, so that they too may have sons and daughters. Become many there, and do not decrease. 7 And seek the peace of the city to which I have exiled you, and pray in its behalf to Jehovah, for in its peace you will have peace. 8 For this is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says: “Do not let your prophets and your diviners who are among you deceive you, and do not listen to the dreams that they are dreaming. 9 For ‘they are prophesying lies to you in my name. I have not sent them,’ declares Jehovah.”’”10 “For this is what Jehovah says, ‘When 70 years at Babylon are fulfilled, I will turn my attention to you, and I will make good my promise by bringing you back to this place.’11 “‘For I well know the thoughts that I am thinking toward you,’ declares Jehovah, ‘thoughts of peace, and not of calamity, to give you a future and a hope. 12 And you will call me and come and pray to me, and I will listen to you.’13 “‘You will seek me and find me, for you will search for me with all your heart. 14 And I will let you find me,’ declares Jehovah. ‘And I will gather your captives and collect you together out of all the nations and places to which I have dispersed you,’ declares Jehovah. ‘And I will bring you back to the place from which I caused you to go into exile.’15 “But you have said, ‘Jehovah has raised up prophets for us in Babylon.’16 “For this is what Jehovah says to the king sitting on the throne of David and to all the people dwelling in this city, your brothers who have not gone with you into exile, 17 ‘This is what Jehovah of armies says: “Here I am sending against them the sword, the famine, and the pestilence, and I will make them like rotten figs that are so bad they cannot be eaten.”’18 “‘And I will pursue them with the sword, with famine, and with pestilence, and I will make them an object of horror to all the kingdoms of the earth, and a curse, and an object of astonishment, something to whistle at, and a reproach among all the nations to which I disperse them, 19 because they have not listened to my words that I sent to them with my servants the prophets,’ declares Jehovah, ‘sending them again and again.’“‘But you have not listened,’ declares Jehovah.20 “Therefore, hear the word of Jehovah, all you exiled people, whom I have sent away from Jerusalem to Babylon. 21 This is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says concerning Aʹhab the son of Ko·laiʹah and concerning Zed·e·kiʹah the son of Ma·a·seiʹah, who are prophesying lies to you in my name, ‘Here I am giving them into the hand of King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon, and he will strike them down before your eyes. 22 And what happens to them will become a curse spoken by all the exiles of Judah in Babylon: “May Jehovah make you like Zed·e·kiʹah and like Aʹhab, whom the king of Babylon roasted in the fire!” 23 for they have acted disgracefully in Israel, committing adultery with the wives of their neighbors and speaking false words in my name that I did not command them.“‘“I am the One who knows, and I am a witness,” declares Jehovah.’”24 “And to She·maiʹah of Ne·helʹam you will say, 25 ‘This is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says: “Because you sent in your name letters to all the people who are in Jerusalem, to Zeph·a·niʹah son of Ma·a·seiʹah, the priest, and to all the priests, saying, 26 ‘Jehovah has made you priest instead of Je·hoiʹa·da the priest to become the overseer of the house of Jehovah, to be in charge of any madman who acts like a prophet and to put him into the stocks and into the pillory; 27 why, then, have you not rebuked Jeremiah of Anʹa·thoth, who is acting as a prophet for you? 28 For he even sent to us at Babylon, saying: “It will be a long time! Build houses and live in them. Plant gardens and eat their fruit,—”’”’”29 When Zeph·a·niʹah the priest read this letter in the hearing of Jeremiah the prophet, 30 the word of Jehovah came to Jeremiah, saying: 31 “Send to all the exiled people, saying, ‘This is what Jehovah says concerning She·maiʹah of Ne·helʹam: “Because She·maiʹah prophesied to you, though I did not send him, and he tried to make you trust in lies, 32 therefore this is what Jehovah says, ‘Here I am turning my attention to She·maiʹah of Ne·helʹam and his descendants. Not one man of his will survive among this people, and he will not see the good that I will do for my people,’ declares Jehovah, ‘for he has urged rebellion against Jehovah.’”’”
3 People ask: “If a man sends his wife away and she leaves him and becomes another man’s, should he return to her anymore?”Has that land not been utterly polluted?“You have committed prostitution with many companions,And should you now return to me?” declares Jehovah. 2 “Raise your eyes to the bare hills and see.Where have you not been raped?You sat along the roadways for them,Like a nomad in the wilderness.You keep polluting the landWith your prostitution and your wickedness. 3 So showers of rain are withheld,And there is no rain in the spring.You have the brazen look of a wife who commits prostitution;You refuse to feel shame. 4 But now you call out to me,‘My Father, you are the companion of my youth! 5 Should one stay resentful forever,Or always hold a grudge?’This is what you say,But you keep doing all the evil you are capable of doing.”6 In the days of King Jo·siʹah, Jehovah said to me: “‘Have you seen what unfaithful Israel has done? She has gone up on every high mountain and underneath every luxuriant tree to commit prostitution. 7 Even after she did all these things, I kept telling her to return to me, but she did not return; and Judah kept watching her treacherous sister. 8 When I saw that, I sent unfaithful Israel away with a full certificate of divorce because of her adultery. But her treacherous sister Judah did not become afraid; she too went out and committed prostitution. 9 She took her prostitution lightly, and she kept polluting the land and committing adultery with stones and with trees. 10 Despite all this, her treacherous sister Judah did not return to me with all her heart, only in pretense,’ declares Jehovah.”11 Jehovah then said to me: “Unfaithful Israel has shown herself to be more righteous than treacherous Judah. 12 Go and proclaim these words to the north:“‘“Return, O renegade Israel,” declares Jehovah.’ ‘“I will not look down angrily on you, for I am loyal,” declares Jehovah.’ ‘“I will not stay resentful forever. 13 Only acknowledge your guilt, for you have rebelled against Jehovah your God. You continued scattering your favors to strangers under every luxuriant tree, but you would not obey my voice,” declares Jehovah.’”14 “Return, you renegade sons,” declares Jehovah. “For I have become your true master; and I will take you, one from a city and two from a family, and I will bring you to Zion. 15 And I will give you shepherds after my own heart, and they will feed you with knowledge and insight. 16 You will become many and will bear fruit in the land in those days,” declares Jehovah. “No more will they say, ‘The ark of the covenant of Jehovah!’ It will not come up into the heart, nor will they remember it or miss it, and it will not be made again. 17 At that time they will call Jerusalem the throne of Jehovah; and all the nations will be brought together to the name of Jehovah at Jerusalem, and they will no longer stubbornly follow their own wicked heart.”18 “In those days they will walk together, the house of Judah alongside the house of Israel, and together they will come from the land of the north into the land that I gave to your forefathers as an inheritance. 19 And I thought, ‘How I placed you among the sons and gave you the desirable land, the most beautiful inheritance among the nations!’ I also thought that you would call me, ‘My Father!’ and that you would not turn away from following me. 20 ‘Truly as a wife treacherously leaves her husband, so also you, O house of Israel, have dealt treacherously with me,’ declares Jehovah.”21 On the bare hills a sound is heard,The weeping and the pleading of the people of Israel,For they have distorted their way;They have forgotten Jehovah their God.22 “Return, you renegade sons.I will heal your renegade condition.”“Here we are! We have come to you,For you, O Jehovah, are our God.23 Truly the hills and the turmoil on the mountains are a delusion.Truly in Jehovah our God is the salvation of Israel.24 But the shameful thing has consumed the toil of our forefathers since our youth,Their flocks and their herds,Their sons and their daughters.25 Let us lie down in our shame,And let our disgrace cover us,For we have sinned against Jehovah our God,We and our fathers since our youth until this day,And we have not obeyed the voice of Jehovah our God.”
30 The word that came to Jeremiah from Jehovah, saying: 2 “This is what Jehovah the God of Israel says, ‘Write in a book all the words that I speak to you. 3 For “look! the days are coming,” declares Jehovah, “when I will gather the captives of my people, Israel and Judah,” says Jehovah, “and I will bring them back to the land that I gave to their forefathers, and they will possess it once again.”’”4 These are the words that Jehovah spoke to Israel and Judah. 5 This is what Jehovah says:“We have heard the sounds of trembling;There is terror, and no peace. 6 Ask, please, whether a man can give birth.Why, then, do I see every strong man with his hands on his stomachLike a woman giving birth?Why has every face turned pale? 7 Alas! For that day is a terrible one.There is none like it,A time of distress for Jacob.But he will be saved out of it.”8 “And in that day,” declares Jehovah of armies, “I will break the yoke from off your neck, and your straps I will tear in two; and no more will strangers make him their slave. 9 They will serve Jehovah their God and David their king, whom I will raise up for them.”10 “And you, my servant Jacob, do not be afraid,” declares Jehovah,“And do not be terrified, O Israel.For I will save you from far awayAnd your offspring from the land of their captivity.Jacob will return and be calm and undisturbed,With no one to make them afraid.”11 “For I am with you,” declares Jehovah, “to save you.But I will make an extermination among all the nations to which I scattered you;However, you I will not exterminate.I will discipline you to the proper degree,And I will by no means leave you unpunished.”12 For this is what Jehovah says:“There is no cure for your breakdown.Your wound is incurable.13 There is no one to plead your cause,No means of healing your ulcer.There is no cure for you.14 All your passionate lovers have forgotten you.They no longer seek you out.For with the stroke of an enemy I have struck you,With the punishment of someone cruel,Because of your great guilt and your many sins.15 Why do you cry out because of your breakdown?Your pain is incurable!Because of your great guilt and your many sinsI have done this to you.16 Therefore all those devouring you will be devoured,And all your enemies will also go into captivity.Those pillaging you will be pillaged,And I will hand all those plundering you over to plundering.”17 “But I will restore your health and heal your wounds,” declares Jehovah,“Though they called you an outcast:‘Zion, for whom no one searches.’”18 This is what Jehovah says:“Here I am gathering the captives of the tents of Jacob,And I will have pity for his tabernacles.The city will be rebuilt on her mound,And the fortified tower will stand on its rightful site.19 And from them will come thanksgiving and the sounds of laughter.I will multiply them, and they will not be few;I will make them numerous,And they will not be insignificant.20 His sons will become as in the past,And before me his assembly will be firmly established.I will deal with all his oppressors.21 His majestic one will be one of his own,And from his midst his ruler will emerge.I will cause him to come near, and he will approach me.”“For otherwise, who would dare to approach me?” declares Jehovah.22 “And you will become my people, and I will be your God.”23 Look! A windstorm of Jehovah will burst out in fury,A sweeping tempest that whirls down on the head of the wicked.24 The burning anger of Jehovah will not turn backUntil he has carried out and accomplished the intentions of his heart.In the final part of the days you will understand this.
31 “At that time,” declares Jehovah, “I will become God to all the families of Israel, and they will become my people.” 2 This is what Jehovah says:“The people who survived the sword found favor in the wildernessWhen Israel was walking to his resting-place.” 3 From far away Jehovah appeared to me and said:“I have loved you with an everlasting love.That is why I have drawn you to me with loyal love. 4 Yet again I will rebuild you and you will be rebuilt.O virgin of Israel, you will again take up your tambourinesAnd go forth dancing joyfully. 5 You will again plant vineyards in the mountains of Sa·marʹi·a;The planters will plant and enjoy their fruit. 6 For the day will come when the watchmen in the mountains of Eʹphra·im will call out:‘Rise up, let us go up to Zion, to Jehovah our God.’” 7 For this is what Jehovah says:“Cry out to Jacob with rejoicing.Shout for joy because you are over the nations.Proclaim it; offer praise and say,‘O Jehovah, save your people, the remnant of Israel.’ 8 I am bringing them back from the land of the north.I will gather them together from the remotest parts of the earth.Among them will be the blind and the lame,The pregnant woman and the one giving birth, all together.As a great congregation they will return here. 9 They will come weeping.I will lead them as they beg for favor.I will guide them to streams of water,On a level path that will not make them stumble.For I am a Father to Israel, and Eʹphra·im is my firstborn.”10 Hear the word of Jehovah, you nations,And proclaim it among the islands far away:“The One who scattered Israel will gather him together.He will watch over him as a shepherd does his flock.11 For Jehovah will redeem JacobAnd rescue him out of the hand of the one stronger than he is.12 They will come and shout joyfully on the height of ZionAnd become radiant over the goodness of Jehovah,Over the grain and the new wine and the oil,And over the young of the flock and the herd.They will become like a well-watered garden,And they will never languish again.”13 “At that time the virgin will dance joyfully,Also the young men and the old men together.I will change their mourning into exultation.I will comfort them and give them joy instead of their grief.14 I will satisfy the priests with plenty,And my people will be satisfied with my goodness,” declares Jehovah.15 “This is what Jehovah says:‘A voice is heard in Raʹmah, lamentation and bitter weeping:Rachel is weeping over her sons.She has refused to be comforted over her sons,Because they are no more.’”16 This is what Jehovah says:“‘Hold back your voice from weeping and your eyes from tears,For there is a reward for your activity,’ declares Jehovah.‘They will return from the land of the enemy.’17 ‘And there is a hope for your future,’ declares Jehovah.‘Your sons will return to their own territory.’”18 “I have surely heard Eʹphra·im’s moaning,‘You have corrected me, and I have been corrected,Like a calf that has not been trained.Bring me back, and I will readily turn back,For you are Jehovah my God.19 For after my turning back I felt remorse;After I was made to understand I struck my thigh in grief.I was ashamed and humiliated,For I bore the reproach of my youth.’”20 “Is Eʹphra·im not a precious son to me, a beloved child?For as often as I speak against him, I do remember him still.That is why my emotions are stirred for him.And I will surely have pity on him,” declares Jehovah.21 “Set up road markers for yourself,And put up signposts.Pay attention to the highway, the way that you have to go.Return, O virgin of Israel, return to these cities of yours.22 How long will you waver, O unfaithful daughter?For Jehovah has created something new in the earth:A woman will eagerly pursue a man.”23 This is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says: “They will again say these words in the land of Judah and in its cities when I gather back their captives: ‘May Jehovah bless you, O righteous dwelling place, O holy mountain.’ 24 And in it Judah and all its cities will dwell all together, farmers and those who lead the flocks. 25 For I will satisfy the weary one and fill each one who is languishing.”26 At this I awoke and opened my eyes, and my sleep had been pleasurable to me.27 “Look! The days are coming,” declares Jehovah, “when I will sow the house of Israel and the house of Judah with the seed of man and with the seed of livestock.”28 “And just as I watched over them to uproot, to pull down, to tear down, to destroy, and to do harm, so I will watch over them to build up and to plant,” declares Jehovah. 29 “In those days they will no longer say, ‘The fathers ate sour grapes, but the teeth of the sons were set on edge.’ 30 But then each one will die for his own error. Any man eating sour grapes will have his own teeth set on edge.”31 “Look! The days are coming,” declares Jehovah, “when I will make with the house of Israel and with the house of Judah a new covenant. 32 It will not be like the covenant that I made with their forefathers on the day I took hold of their hand to lead them out of the land of Egypt, ‘my covenant that they broke, although I was their true master,’ declares Jehovah.”33 “For this is the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel after those days,” declares Jehovah. “I will put my law within them, and in their heart I will write it. And I will become their God, and they will become my people.”34 “And they will no longer teach each one his neighbor and each one his brother, saying, ‘Know Jehovah!’ for they will all know me, from the least to the greatest of them,” declares Jehovah. “For I will forgive their error, and I will no longer remember their sin.”35 This is what Jehovah says,Who gives the sun for light by day,The laws of the moon and the stars for light by night,Who stirs up the sea and makes its waves boisterous,Whose name is Jehovah of armies:36 “‘If these regulations should ever fail,’ declares Jehovah,‘Only then would the offspring of Israel cease as a nation before me always.’”37 This is what Jehovah says: “‘If the heavens above could be measured and the foundations of the earth below could be explored, only then could I reject all the offspring of Israel for all they have done,’ declares Jehovah.”38 “Look! The days are coming,” declares Jehovah, “when the city will be built to Jehovah from the Tower of Ha·nanʹel to the Corner Gate. 39 And the measuring line will go out straight ahead to the hill of Gaʹreb, and it will turn toward Goʹah. 40 And all the valley of the carcasses and of ashes and all the terraces as far as the Kidʹron Valley, clear to the corner of the Horse Gate toward the east, will be something holy to Jehovah. It will never again be uprooted or torn down.”
32 The word that came to Jeremiah from Jehovah in the 10th year of King Zed·e·kiʹah of Judah, that is, the 18th year of Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar. 2 At that time the armies of the king of Babylon were besieging Jerusalem, and Jeremiah the prophet was confined in the Courtyard of the Guard in the house of the king of Judah. 3 For King Zed·e·kiʹah of Judah had confined him, saying, “Why do you prophesy like this? You say, ‘This is what Jehovah says: “I will give this city into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he will capture it, 4 and King Zed·e·kiʹah of Judah will not escape from the Chal·deʹans, for he will surely be given into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he will speak to him face-to-face and see him eye to eye.”’ 5 ‘He will take Zed·e·kiʹah to Babylon, and there he will remain until I turn my attention to him,’ declares Jehovah. ‘Although you keep fighting against the Chal·deʹans, you will not succeed.’”6 Jeremiah said: “The word of Jehovah has come to me, saying, 7 ‘Here Hanʹa·mel the son of Shalʹlum your uncle will come to you and say: “Buy for yourself my field in Anʹa·thoth, because you have the first right to repurchase it.”’”8 Hanʹa·mel the son of my uncle came to me, just as Jehovah had said, into the Courtyard of the Guard, and he said to me: “Please buy my field in Anʹa·thoth, in the land of Benjamin, for you have the right to take possession of it and to repurchase it. Buy it for yourself.” At that I knew that this was by the word of Jehovah.9 So I bought the field in Anʹa·thoth from Hanʹa·mel the son of my uncle. I weighed out the money to him, seven shekels and ten silver pieces. 10 Then I recorded it in a deed, affixed the seal, called in witnesses, and weighed the money in the scales. 11 I took the deed of purchase, the one that was sealed according to the commandment and legal requirements, as well as the one that was left unsealed, 12 and I gave the deed of purchase to Barʹuch son of Ne·riʹah son of Mah·seiʹah in the presence of Hanʹa·mel the son of my uncle, the witnesses who wrote in the deed of purchase, and all the Jews who were sitting in the Courtyard of the Guard.13 I now commanded Barʹuch in their presence, saying: 14 “This is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says, ‘Take these deeds, this deed of purchase, the sealed one and the other deed left unsealed, and put them into an earthenware vessel, so that they may be kept for a long time.’ 15 For this is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says, ‘Houses and fields and vineyards will again be bought in this land.’”16 Then I prayed to Jehovah after giving the deed of purchase to Barʹuch the son of Ne·riʹah, saying: 17 “Alas, O Sovereign Lord Jehovah! Look! You made the heavens and the earth by your great power and by your outstretched arm. Nothing is too wonderful for you, 18 the One showing loyal love to thousands, but repaying the error of the fathers to their sons after them, the true God, the great and mighty One, whose name is Jehovah of armies. 19 You are great in counsel and mighty in deed, you whose eyes observe all the ways of men, to give to each one according to his ways and according to what he does. 20 You have performed signs and miracles in the land of Egypt, which are known down to this day, and thus you have made a name for yourself in Israel and among mankind, as it is today. 21 And you brought your people Israel out of the land of Egypt, with signs, with miracles, with a mighty hand, with an outstretched arm, and with terrifying deeds.22 “In time you gave them this land that you swore to give to their forefathers, a land flowing with milk and honey. 23 And they came in and took possession of it, but they did not obey your voice or walk in your law. They did not do anything you commanded them to do, so that you caused all this calamity to befall them. 24 Look! Men have come with siege ramparts to capture the city, and because of the sword, the famine, and the pestilence, the city will certainly fall into the hands of the Chal·deʹans who are fighting against it; what you said has all happened, as you now see. 25 But you have told me, O Sovereign Lord Jehovah, ‘Buy for yourself the field with money and call in witnesses,’ although the city will certainly be given into the hand of the Chal·deʹans.”26 At that the word of Jehovah came to Jeremiah, saying: 27 “Here I am, Jehovah, the God of all mankind. Is there anything too wonderful for me? 28 So this is what Jehovah says, ‘Here I am handing this city over to the Chal·deʹans and into the hand of King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon, and he will capture it. 29 And the Chal·deʹans fighting against this city will come in and set this city on fire and burn it down along with the houses on whose roofs the people offered sacrifices to Baʹal and poured out drink offerings to other gods to offend me.’30 “‘For the people of Israel and of Judah have done only what was bad in my eyes, from their youth on; the people of Israel keep offending me by the work of their hands,’ declares Jehovah. 31 ‘For this city, from the day that they built it down to this day, has been nothing but a cause of anger and wrath to me, so that it must be removed from before my face, 32 because of all the evil that the people of Israel and of Judah have done to offend me—they, their kings, their princes, their priests, their prophets, and the men of Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem. 33 They kept turning their backs to me, not their faces; although I tried to teach them again and again, none of them would listen to receive discipline. 34 And they put their disgusting idols in the house that bears my name, in order to defile it. 35 Furthermore, they built the high places of Baʹal in the Valley of the Son of Hinʹnom, in order to make their sons and their daughters pass through the fire to Moʹlech, something that I had not commanded them and that had never come into my heart to do such a detestable thing, causing Judah to sin.’36 “Therefore this is what Jehovah the God of Israel says concerning this city that you are saying will be given into the hand of the king of Babylon by the sword, the famine, and the pestilence, 37 ‘Here I will gather them together from all the lands where I dispersed them in my anger and in my wrath and in great indignation, and I will bring them back to this place and let them dwell in security. 38 And they will be my people, and I will be their God. 39 And I will give them one heart and one way so that they may always fear me, for their own good and the good of their children after them. 40 And I will make with them an everlasting covenant, that I will not turn away from doing good to them; and I will put the fear of me in their hearts, so that they will not turn away from me. 41 I will exult over them to do good to them, and I will firmly plant them in this land, with all my heart and with all my soul.’”42 “For this is what Jehovah says, ‘Just as I have brought on this people all this great calamity, so I will bring on them all the goodness that I am promising them. 43 And fields will again be bought in this land, though you are saying: “It is a wasteland without man and beast, and it has been handed over to the Chal·deʹans.”’44 “‘Fields will be bought with money, deeds of purchase will be recorded and sealed, and witnesses will be called in the land of Benjamin, in the areas around Jerusalem, in the cities of Judah, in the cities of the mountainous region, in the cities of the lowland, and in the cities of the south, because I will bring back their captives,’ declares Jehovah.”
33 The word of Jehovah came to Jeremiah the second time, while he was still confined in the Courtyard of the Guard, saying: 2 “This is what Jehovah the Maker of earth says, Jehovah who formed it and firmly established it; Jehovah is his name, 3 ‘Call to me, and I will answer you and readily tell you great and incomprehensible things that you have not known.’”4 “For this is what Jehovah the God of Israel says concerning the houses of this city and the houses of the kings of Judah that are pulled down because of the siege ramparts and the sword, 5 and concerning those who are coming to fight the Chal·deʹans, filling these places with the carcasses of those whom I struck down in my anger and in my wrath, those whose evil has caused me to hide my face from this city: 6 ‘Here I am bringing recuperation and health to her, and I will heal them and reveal to them an abundance of peace and truth. 7 And I will bring back the captives of Judah and the captives of Israel, and I will build them up as I did at the start. 8 And I will purify them from all the guilt of their sins against me, and I will forgive all the guilt of their sins and their transgressions against me. 9 And she will become to me a name of exultation, a praise, and a beauty before all the nations of the earth who will hear of all the goodness that I bestow on them. And they will be in dread and will tremble because of all the goodness and peace that I will bestow on her.’”10 “This is what Jehovah says: ‘In this place that you will say is a wasteland, without man or livestock, in the cities of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem that are desolate, without man or inhabitant or livestock, there will again be heard 11 the sound of exultation and the sound of rejoicing, the voice of the bridegroom and the voice of the bride, the voice of those saying: “Give thanks to Jehovah of armies, for Jehovah is good; his loyal love endures forever!”’“‘They will bring thanksgiving offerings into the house of Jehovah, for I will bring back the captives of the land, as at the start,’ says Jehovah.”12 “This is what Jehovah of armies says: ‘In this wasteland, without man or livestock, and in all its cities, there will again be pastures for the shepherds to rest their flocks.’13 “‘In the cities of the mountainous region, in the cities of the lowland, in the cities of the south, in the land of Benjamin, in the areas around Jerusalem, and in the cities of Judah, flocks will again pass under the hands of the one counting them,’ says Jehovah.”14 “‘Look! The days are coming,’ declares Jehovah, ‘when I will fulfill the good promise that I have spoken concerning the house of Israel and the house of Judah. 15 In those days and at that time I will cause to sprout for David a righteous sprout, and he will execute justice and righteousness in the land. 16 In those days Judah will be saved and Jerusalem will reside in security. And this is what she will be called: Jehovah Is Our Righteousness.’”17 “For this is what Jehovah says: ‘There will never fail to be a man from David’s line to sit on the throne of the house of Israel, 18 nor will the Levitical priests ever fail to have a man stand before me to offer whole burnt offerings, to burn grain offerings, and to offer sacrifices.’”19 And the word of Jehovah again came to Jeremiah, saying: 20 “This is what Jehovah says, ‘If you could break my covenant regarding the day and my covenant regarding the night, to prevent day and night from coming at their proper time, 21 only then could my covenant with my servant David be broken, so that he should not have a son ruling as king on his throne, and so also my covenant with the Levitical priests, my ministers. 22 Just as the army of the heavens cannot be counted and the sand of the sea cannot be measured, so I will multiply the offspring of my servant David and the Levites who are ministering to me.’”23 And the word of Jehovah again came to Jeremiah, saying: 24 “Have you not taken note of what this people is saying, ‘Jehovah will reject the two families that he chose’? And they are treating my own people with disrespect, and they no longer regard them as a nation.25 “This is what Jehovah says: ‘Just as surely as I have established my covenant regarding the day and the night, the laws of heaven and earth, 26 so I will never reject the offspring of Jacob and of my servant David, so as not to take from his offspring rulers over the descendants of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. For I will gather back their captives and have pity on them.’”
34 The word that came to Jeremiah from Jehovah, when King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon and all his army and all the kingdoms of the earth under his dominion and all the peoples were fighting against Jerusalem and all her cities:2 “This is what Jehovah the God of Israel says, ‘Go and speak to King Zed·e·kiʹah of Judah and tell him: “This is what Jehovah says, ‘Here I am giving this city into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he will burn it with fire. 3 And you will not escape out of his hand, for you will without fail be caught and handed over to him. And you will see the king of Babylon eye to eye, and he will speak to you face-to-face, and you will go to Babylon.’ 4 However, hear the word of Jehovah, O King Zed·e·kiʹah of Judah, ‘This is what Jehovah says concerning you: “You will not die by the sword. 5 In peace you will die, and they will make a burning ceremony for you as they did for your fathers, the former kings who were before you, and they will mourn you, ‘Alas, O master!’ for ‘I have spoken the word,’ declares Jehovah.”’”’”6 Jeremiah the prophet then spoke all these words to King Zed·e·kiʹah of Judah in Jerusalem, 7 when the armies of the king of Babylon were fighting against Jerusalem and against all the cities of Judah that were left, against Laʹchish and against A·zeʹkah; for they were the only fortified cities that remained of the cities of Judah.8 The word that came to Jeremiah from Jehovah after King Zed·e·kiʹah had made a covenant with all the people in Jerusalem to proclaim liberty to them, 9 that everyone should free his Hebrew slaves, male and female, so that no one would keep a fellow Jew as his slave. 10 So all the princes and all the people obeyed. They had entered into the covenant that everyone should free his male and female slaves and not keep them as slaves any longer. They obeyed and let them go. 11 However, they later brought back the male and female slaves whom they had freed, and they again forced them back into slavery. 12 So the word of Jehovah came to Jeremiah from Jehovah, saying:13 “This is what Jehovah the God of Israel says, ‘I made a covenant with your forefathers in the day I brought them out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of slavery, saying: 14 “At the end of seven years, each of you should free his Hebrew brother who was sold to you and who has served you six years; you must set him free.” But your forefathers did not listen or incline their ears to me. 15 And recently you yourselves turned around and did what was right in my eyes by proclaiming liberty to your fellow men, and you made a covenant before me in the house that bears my name. 16 But then you turned around and profaned my name by bringing back your male and female slaves whom you had freed according to their desire, and you forced them back into slavery.’17 “Therefore this is what Jehovah says: ‘You have not obeyed me in proclaiming liberty, each one to his brother and to his fellow man. So I will now proclaim liberty to you,’ declares Jehovah, ‘to the sword, to pestilence, and to famine, and I will make you an object of horror to all the kingdoms of the earth. 18 And this is what will happen to the men who violated my covenant by not carrying out the words of the covenant that they made before me when they cut the calf in two and passed between the halves, 19 namely, the princes of Judah, the princes of Jerusalem, the court officials, the priests, and all the people of the land who passed between the halves of the calf: 20 I will hand them over to their enemies and to those seeking to take their lives, and their dead bodies will become food for the birds of the heavens and for the beasts of the earth. 21 And I will give King Zed·e·kiʹah of Judah and his princes into the hand of their enemies and into the hand of those seeking to take their lives and into the hand of the armies of the king of Babylon, who are withdrawing from against you.’22 “‘Here I will give the order,’ declares Jehovah, ‘and I will bring them back to this city, and they will fight against it and capture it and burn it with fire; and the cities of Judah I will make a wasteland, without an inhabitant.’”
35 The word that came to Jeremiah from Jehovah in the days of Je·hoiʹa·kim son of Jo·siʹah, the king of Judah, saying: 2 “Go to the house of the Reʹcha·bites and speak with them and bring them into the house of Jehovah, into one of the dining rooms; then offer them wine to drink.”3 So I took Ja·az·a·niʹah the son of Jeremiah the son of Hab·az·zi·niʹah, his brothers, all his sons, and the entire house of the Reʹcha·bites 4 into the house of Jehovah. I brought them to the dining room of the sons of Haʹnan the son of Ig·da·liʹah, a man of the true God, which was next to the dining room of the princes that was above the dining room of Ma·a·seiʹah the son of Shalʹlum the doorkeeper. 5 Then I put cups and goblets full of wine before the men of the house of the Reʹcha·bites and said to them: “Drink wine.”6 But they said: “We will not drink wine, because Je·honʹa·dab the son of Reʹchab, our forefather, gave us this command, ‘Neither you nor your sons must ever drink wine. 7 And you must not build a house, sow seed, or plant or obtain a vineyard. Instead, you must always dwell in tents, so that you may live for a long time in the land where you are residing as foreigners.’ 8 So we continue to obey the voice of Je·honʹa·dab the son of our forefather Reʹchab in all that he commanded us, by never drinking any wine—we, our wives, our sons, and our daughters. 9 And we do not build houses to dwell in, nor do we have vineyards or fields or seed. 10 We keep living in tents and obeying all that Je·honʹa·dab our forefather commanded us. 11 But when King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon came up against the land, we said, ‘Come, let us go into Jerusalem to escape the army of the Chal·deʹans and of the Syrians,’ and now we are living in Jerusalem.”12 And the word of Jehovah came to Jeremiah, saying: 13 “This is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says, ‘Go and say to the men of Judah and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem: “Were you not continually urged to obey my words?” declares Jehovah. 14 “Je·honʹa·dab the son of Reʹchab commanded his descendants not to drink wine, and they have carried out his words by not drinking it to this day, thus obeying the order of their forefather. However, I have spoken to you again and again, but you have not obeyed me. 15 And I kept sending all my servants the prophets to you, sending them again and again, saying, ‘Turn back, please, each of you from your evil ways, and do what is right! Do not walk after other gods and serve them. Then you will keep dwelling in the land that I gave to you and your forefathers.’ But you did not incline your ear or listen to me. 16 The descendants of Je·honʹa·dab the son of Reʹchab have carried out the order that their forefather gave them, but these people have not listened to me.”’”17 “Therefore this is what Jehovah, the God of armies, the God of Israel, says: ‘Here I am bringing on Judah and on all the inhabitants of Jerusalem all the calamity that I have warned them about, for I have spoken to them, but they would not listen, and I kept calling to them, but they would not answer.’”18 And Jeremiah said to the household of the Reʹcha·bites: “This is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says, ‘Because you have obeyed the order of your forefather Je·honʹa·dab and you continue to observe all his orders, doing exactly what he ordered you, 19 this is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says: “There will never fail to be a descendant of Je·honʹa·dab the son of Reʹchab to serve in my presence.”’”
36 Now in the fourth year of Je·hoiʹa·kim son of Jo·siʹah, the king of Judah, this word came to Jeremiah from Jehovah, saying: 2 “Take a scroll and write in it all the words that I have spoken to you against Israel and Judah and all the nations, from the first day I spoke to you in the days of Jo·siʹah to this day. 3 Perhaps when those of the house of Judah hear of all the calamity that I intend to bring on them, they may turn back from their evil ways, so that I may forgive their error and their sin.”4 Jeremiah then called Barʹuch the son of Ne·riʹah, and Jeremiah dictated all the words that Jehovah had spoken to him, and Barʹuch wrote them in the scroll. 5 Then Jeremiah commanded Barʹuch: “I am confined and unable to enter the house of Jehovah. 6 So you are the one who must go in and read aloud the words of Jehovah from the scroll that you wrote at my dictation. Read them in the hearing of the people at the house of Jehovah on the day of a fast; thus you will read them to all the people of Judah who come in from their cities. 7 Perhaps their request for favor will reach Jehovah, and they will turn back, each one from his evil ways, for great is the anger and the wrath that Jehovah has declared against this people.”8 So Barʹuch the son of Ne·riʹah did all that Jeremiah the prophet had commanded him; he read aloud from the scroll the words of Jehovah at the house of Jehovah.9 Now in the fifth year of Je·hoiʹa·kim son of Jo·siʹah, the king of Judah, in the ninth month, all the people in Jerusalem and all the people who came into Jerusalem from the cities of Judah proclaimed a fast before Jehovah. 10 Barʹuch then read aloud from the scroll the words of Jeremiah at the house of Jehovah, in the chamber of Gem·a·riʹah the son of Shaʹphan the copyist, in the upper courtyard, at the entrance of the new gate of the house of Jehovah, in the hearing of all the people.11 When Mi·caiʹah the son of Gem·a·riʹah the son of Shaʹphan heard all the words of Jehovah from the scroll, 12 he went down to the house of the king, to the secretary’s chamber. All the princes were sitting there: E·lishʹa·ma the secretary, De·laʹiah the son of She·maiʹah, El·naʹthan the son of Achʹbor, Gem·a·riʹah the son of Shaʹphan, Zed·e·kiʹah the son of Han·a·niʹah, and all the other princes. 13 Mi·caiʹah told them all the words that he had heard when Barʹuch read from the scroll in the hearing of the people.14 Then all the princes sent Je·huʹdi the son of Neth·a·niʹah the son of Shel·e·miʹah the son of Cushʹi to Barʹuch, saying: “Come and bring with you the scroll from which you read in the hearing of the people.” Barʹuch the son of Ne·riʹah took the scroll in his hand and went in to them. 15 They said to him: “Sit down, please, and read it aloud to us.” So Barʹuch read it to them.16 Now as soon as they heard all the words, they looked at one another in dread, and they said to Barʹuch: “We must certainly tell the king all these words.” 17 And they asked Barʹuch: “Tell us, please, how you wrote all these words. Was it at his dictation?” 18 Barʹuch replied to them: “He dictated all these words to me, and I wrote them down with ink in this scroll.” 19 The princes said to Barʹuch: “Go and hide yourselves, you and Jeremiah, and do not let anyone know where you are.”20 Then they went in to the king, to the courtyard, and deposited the scroll in the chamber of E·lishʹa·ma the secretary, and they told the king everything they had heard.21 So the king sent Je·huʹdi out to get the scroll, and he brought it from the chamber of E·lishʹa·ma the secretary. Je·huʹdi began to read it in the hearing of the king and of all the princes standing by the king. 22 The king was sitting in the winter house, in the ninth month, with a fire burning in the brazier before him. 23 After Je·huʹdi had read three or four columns, the king would cut off that portion with the secretary’s knife and pitch it into the fire that was burning in the brazier, until the entire scroll ended up in the fire that was in the brazier. 24 And they felt no dread; neither the king nor all his servants who heard all these words ripped their garments apart. 25 Although El·naʹthan, De·laʹiah, and Gem·a·riʹah pleaded with the king not to burn the scroll, he did not listen to them. 26 Further, the king commanded Je·rahʹme·el the son of the king, Se·raiʹah the son of Azʹri·el, and Shel·e·miʹah the son of Abʹde·el to seize Barʹuch the secretary and Jeremiah the prophet, but Jehovah kept them concealed.27 And the word of Jehovah again came to Jeremiah after the king had burned up the scroll containing the words that Barʹuch had written at Jeremiah’s dictation, saying: 28 “Take another scroll and write on it all the same words that were on the first scroll, which King Je·hoiʹa·kim of Judah burned up. 29 And you should say against King Je·hoiʹa·kim of Judah, ‘This is what Jehovah says: “You have burned up this scroll and said, ‘Why have you written on it: “The king of Babylon will certainly come and destroy this land and empty it of man and beast”?’ 30 Therefore this is what Jehovah says against King Je·hoiʹa·kim of Judah, ‘He will have no one to sit on the throne of David, and his dead body will be left exposed to the heat by day and the frost by night. 31 I will call him and his descendants and his servants to account for their error, and I will bring on them and on the inhabitants of Jerusalem and on the men of Judah all the calamity that I have spoken against them, but they did not listen.’”’”32 Jeremiah then took another scroll and gave it to Barʹuch the son of Ne·riʹah, the secretary, and at Jeremiah’s dictation he wrote on it all the words of the scroll that King Je·hoiʹa·kim of Judah had burned in the fire. And many more words like those were added.
37 And King Zed·e·kiʹah the son of Jo·siʹah began to reign in place of Co·niʹah the son of Je·hoiʹa·kim, for King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon made him king in the land of Judah. 2 But he and his servants and the people of the land did not listen to the words of Jehovah spoken through Jeremiah the prophet.3 And King Zed·e·kiʹah sent Je·huʹcal the son of Shel·e·miʹah and Zeph·a·niʹah the son of Ma·a·seiʹah the priest to Jeremiah the prophet, saying: “Please pray in our behalf to Jehovah our God.” 4 Jeremiah was moving about freely among the people, for they had not yet put him in prison. 5 Now Pharʹaoh’s army had set out from Egypt, and the Chal·deʹans who were besieging Jerusalem heard the report about them. So they withdrew from against Jerusalem. 6 Then the word of Jehovah came to Jeremiah the prophet, saying: 7 “This is what Jehovah the God of Israel says, ‘This is what you should say to the king of Judah, who sent you to me to inquire of me: “Look! The army of Pharʹaoh that is coming to assist you will have to go back to their land, Egypt. 8 And the Chal·deʹans will come back and fight against this city and capture it and burn it with fire.” 9 This is what Jehovah says, “Do not deceive yourselves by saying, ‘The Chal·deʹans will surely go away from against us,’ because they will not go away. 10 Even if you were to strike down the entire army of the Chal·deʹans who are fighting against you and only their wounded men were left, they would still rise up from their tents and burn this city with fire.”’”11 When the Chal·deʹan army had withdrawn from against Jerusalem because of Pharʹaoh’s army, 12 Jeremiah set out from Jerusalem to the land of Benjamin to receive his portion there among his people. 13 But when he reached the Gate of Benjamin, the officer in charge of the guard, whose name was I·riʹjah the son of Shel·e·miʹah the son of Han·a·niʹah, seized Jeremiah the prophet and said: “You are deserting to the Chal·deʹans!” 14 But Jeremiah said: “It is not true! I am not deserting to the Chal·deʹans.” But he did not listen to him. So I·riʹjah arrested Jeremiah and brought him in to the princes. 15 The princes were furious with Jeremiah, and they beat him and imprisoned him in the house of Je·honʹa·than the secretary, which had been made into a prison. 16 Jeremiah was put into the dungeon, into the vaulted rooms, and he remained there many days.17 Then King Zed·e·kiʹah sent for him, and the king secretly questioned him in his house. He asked, “Is there any word from Jehovah?” Jeremiah said, “There is!” and he continued, “You will be given into the hand of the king of Babylon!”18 Jeremiah also said to King Zed·e·kiʹah: “How have I sinned against you and against your servants and against this people, so that you have put me into the prison? 19 Where, now, are your prophets who prophesied to you, ‘The king of Babylon will not come against you and against this land’? 20 Now listen, please, O my lord the king. May you grant, please, my request for favor. Do not send me back to the house of Je·honʹa·than the secretary, or I will die there.” 21 So King Zed·e·kiʹah ordered that Jeremiah be put in custody in the Courtyard of the Guard, and he was given a round loaf of bread daily from the street of the bakers until all the bread in the city was gone. And Jeremiah remained in the Courtyard of the Guard.
38 Now Sheph·a·tiʹah the son of Matʹtan, Ged·a·liʹah the son of Pashʹhur, Juʹcal the son of Shel·e·miʹah, and Pashʹhur the son of Mal·chiʹjah heard the words that Jeremiah was speaking to all the people, saying: 2 “This is what Jehovah says, ‘The one who remains in this city will die by the sword, by famine, and by pestilence. But the one who surrenders to the Chal·deʹans will keep living and will have his life as a spoil and live.’ 3 This is what Jehovah says, ‘This city will surely be handed over to the army of the king of Babylon, and he will capture it.’”4 The princes said to the king: “Please have this man put to death, for this is how he is weakening the morale of the soldiers who are left in this city, as well as that of all the people, by speaking such words to them. For this man seeks, not the peace of this people, but their calamity.” 5 King Zed·e·kiʹah replied: “Look! He is in your hands, for the king cannot do anything to stop you.”6 So they took Jeremiah and threw him into the cistern of Mal·chiʹjah the son of the king, which was in the Courtyard of the Guard. They let Jeremiah down by ropes. Now there was no water in the cistern, only mud, and Jeremiah began to sink down into the mud.7 Eʹbed-melʹech the E·thi·oʹpi·an, a eunuch in the king’s house, heard that they had put Jeremiah into the cistern. Now the king was sitting in the Gate of Benjamin, 8 so Eʹbed-melʹech went out of the king’s house and spoke to the king, saying: 9 “O my lord the king, what these men have done to Jeremiah the prophet is evil! They have thrown him into the cistern, and he will die there because of the famine, for there is no bread left in the city.”10 Then the king commanded Eʹbed-melʹech the E·thi·oʹpi·an: “Take 30 men with you from here, and pull Jeremiah the prophet up out of the cistern before he dies.” 11 So Eʹbed-melʹech took the men with him and went into the king’s house to a place beneath the treasury, and they took from there some worn-out rags and worn-out pieces of cloth and let them down by ropes to Jeremiah in the cistern. 12 Then Eʹbed-melʹech the E·thi·oʹpi·an said to Jeremiah: “Please put the rags and the pieces of cloth between your armpits and the ropes.” Jeremiah did so, 13 and they drew Jeremiah out with the ropes and pulled him up out of the cistern. And Jeremiah remained in the Courtyard of the Guard.14 King Zed·e·kiʹah sent for Jeremiah the prophet to come to him at the third entrance, which is in the house of Jehovah, and the king said to Jeremiah: “I have something to ask of you. Do not hide anything from me.” 15 Jeremiah then said to Zed·e·kiʹah: “If I tell you, you will certainly put me to death. And if I give you advice, you will not listen to me.” 16 So King Zed·e·kiʹah secretly swore to Jeremiah, saying: “As surely as Jehovah is alive, who has given us this life, I will not put you to death, and I will not hand you over to these men who are seeking to take your life.”17 Jeremiah then said to Zed·e·kiʹah: “This is what Jehovah, the God of armies, the God of Israel, says, ‘If you surrender to the princes of the king of Babylon, your life will be spared, and this city will not be burned with fire, and you and your household will be spared. 18 But if you will not surrender to the princes of the king of Babylon, this city will be handed over to the Chal·deʹans, and they will burn it with fire, and you will not escape out of their hand.’”19 Then King Zed·e·kiʹah said to Jeremiah: “I am afraid of the Jews who have deserted to the Chal·deʹans, for if I am handed over to them, they may deal cruelly with me.” 20 But Jeremiah said: “You will not be handed over to them. Obey, please, the voice of Jehovah in what I am telling you, and it will go well with you, and you will continue to live. 21 But if you refuse to surrender, this is what Jehovah has revealed to me: 22 Look! All the women remaining in the house of the king of Judah are being brought out to the princes of the king of Babylon, and they are saying,‘The men whom you trusted have deceived you and overcome you.They have caused your foot to sink into the mud.Now they have turned away in retreat.’23 And all your wives and your sons they are bringing out to the Chal·deʹans, and you will not escape out of their hand, but you will be seized by the king of Babylon, and because of you this city will be burned with fire.”24 Zed·e·kiʹah then said to Jeremiah: “Do not let anyone know about these things, so that you do not die. 25 And if the princes hear that I have spoken with you and they come and say to you, ‘Tell us, please, what you said to the king. Do not hide anything from us, and we will not put you to death. What did the king say to you?’ 26 you must answer them, ‘I was making a request of the king, that he not send me back to the house of Je·honʹa·than to die there.’”27 In time all the princes came in to Jeremiah and questioned him. He told them everything that the king had commanded him to say. So they said no more to him, for no one had heard the conversation. 28 Until the day that Jerusalem was captured, Jeremiah remained in the Courtyard of the Guard; he was still there when Jerusalem was captured.
39 In the ninth year of King Zed·e·kiʹah of Judah, in the tenth month, King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon and all his army came to Jerusalem, and they besieged it.2 In the 11th year of Zed·e·kiʹah, in the fourth month, on the ninth day of the month, they broke through the city wall. 3 And all the princes of the king of Babylon went in and sat down in the Middle Gate, namely, Nerʹgal-shar·eʹzer the Samʹgar, Neʹbo-Sarʹse·chim the Rabʹsa·ris, Nerʹgal-shar·eʹzer the Rabʹmag, and all the rest of the princes of the king of Babylon.4 When King Zed·e·kiʹah of Judah and all the soldiers saw them, they fled, going out of the city by night by way of the king’s garden, through the gate between the double wall, and they continued by the way of the Arʹa·bah. 5 But the Chal·deʹan army chased after them, and they overtook Zed·e·kiʹah in the desert plains of Jerʹi·cho. They captured him and brought him up to King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon at Ribʹlah in the land of Haʹmath, where he passed sentence on him. 6 The king of Babylon had the sons of Zed·e·kiʹah slaughtered before his eyes there at Ribʹlah, and the king of Babylon had all the nobles of Judah slaughtered. 7 Then he blinded the eyes of Zed·e·kiʹah, after which he bound him with copper fetters to bring him to Babylon.8 The Chal·deʹans then burned down the king’s house and the houses of the people, and they tore down the walls of Jerusalem. 9 Neb·uʹzar·adʹan the chief of the guard took into exile to Babylon the rest of the people who were left in the city, the deserters who had defected to him, and anyone who remained.10 But Neb·uʹzar·adʹan the chief of the guard left in the land of Judah some of the poorest people, those who had nothing at all. On that day he also gave them vineyards and fields to work.11 Now King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon gave Neb·uʹzar·adʹan the chief of the guard these orders concerning Jeremiah: 12 “Take him and look after him; do him no harm, and grant whatever he asks of you.”13 So Neb·uʹzar·adʹan the chief of the guard, Neb·u·shazʹban the Rabʹsa·ris, Nerʹgal-shar·eʹzer the Rabʹmag, and all the principal men of the king of Babylon sent 14 and had Jeremiah taken out of the Courtyard of the Guard and handed him over to Ged·a·liʹah the son of A·hiʹkam the son of Shaʹphan to be brought to his house. So he lived among the people.15 While Jeremiah was confined in the Courtyard of the Guard, the word of Jehovah came to him, saying: 16 “Go and tell Eʹbed-melʹech the E·thi·oʹpi·an, ‘This is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says: “Here I am fulfilling my words on this city for calamity and not for good, and in that day you will see it happen.”’17 “‘But I will rescue you in that day,’ declares Jehovah, ‘and you will not be handed over to the men you fear.’18 “‘For I will surely provide you with escape, and you will not fall by the sword. You will have your life as a spoil, because you trusted in me,’ declares Jehovah.”
4 “If you will return, O Israel,” declares Jehovah,“If you will return to meAnd if you will remove your disgusting idols from before me,Then you will not be a fugitive. 2 And if you swear,‘As surely as Jehovah is alive!’ in truth, justice, and righteousness,Then the nations will obtain a blessing for themselves by him,And in him they will boast.”3 For this is what Jehovah says to the men of Judah and to Jerusalem:“Plow for yourselves arable land,And do not keep sowing among thorns. 4 Circumcise yourselves to Jehovah,And remove the foreskins of your hearts,You men of Judah and inhabitants of Jerusalem,So that my wrath may not blaze up like a fireAnd burn with no one to extinguish it,Because of your evil deeds.” 5 Declare it in Judah, and proclaim it in Jerusalem.Shout and blow a horn throughout the land.Call out loudly and say: “Gather together,And let us flee into the fortified cities. 6 Raise a signal toward Zion.Seek shelter, and do not stand still,”For I am bringing in calamity from the north, a great crash. 7 He has emerged like a lion from his thicket;The destroyer of nations has set out.He has gone out from his place to make your land an object of horror.Your cities will be reduced to ruins, without an inhabitant. 8 Therefore, put on sackcloth,Mourn and wail,Because the burning anger of Jehovah has not turned away from us. 9 “In that day,” declares Jehovah, “the heart of the king will fail him,Also the heart of the princes;The priests will be horrified, and the prophets will be amazed.”10 Then I said: “Alas, O Sovereign Lord Jehovah! Truly you have utterly deceived this people and Jerusalem, saying, ‘You will have peace,’ when the sword is at our throats.”11 At that time it will be said to this people and to Jerusalem:“A scorching wind from the barren hills of the desertWill sweep down on the daughter of my people;It is not coming to winnow or to cleanse.12 The full wind comes from these places at my bidding.Now I will pronounce judgments against them.13 Look! He will come like rain clouds,And his chariots are like a storm wind.His horses are swifter than eagles.Woe to us, for we are ruined!14 Wash your heart clean of wickedness, O Jerusalem, in order to be saved.How long will you harbor wicked thoughts?15 For a voice tells the news from Dan,And it proclaims disaster from the mountains of Eʹphra·im.16 Report it, yes, to the nations;Proclaim it against Jerusalem.”“Sentinels are coming from a distant land,And they will raise their voices against the cities of Judah.17 They come against her on all sides like guards of the open field,Because she has rebelled against me,” declares Jehovah.18 “Your own ways and your actions will be brought upon you.How bitter is your disaster,For it reaches clear to your heart!”19 O my anguish, my anguish!I feel great pain in my very heart.My heart pounds within me.I cannot keep silent,For I have heard the sound of the horn,The alarm signal of war.20 Disaster after disaster has been reported,For the whole land has been destroyed.Suddenly my own tents are destroyed,In a moment my tent cloths.21 How long will I keep seeing the signal,Keep hearing the sound of the horn?22 “For my people are foolish;They take no note of me.They are stupid sons, with no understanding.They are clever enough when it comes to doing bad,But they do not know how to do good.”23 I saw the land, and look! it was empty and desolate.I looked at the heavens, and their light was no more.24 I saw the mountains, and look! they were quaking,And the hills were shaking.25 I saw, and look! there was no man,And the birds of the heavens had all fled.26 I saw, and look! the orchard had become a wilderness,And its cities had all been torn down.It was because of Jehovah,Because of his burning anger.27 For this is what Jehovah says: “The whole land will become desolate,But I will not carry out a complete extermination.28 For this reason the land will mourn,And the heavens above will become dark.It is because I have spoken, I have decided,And I will not change my mind, nor will I turn back from it.29 At the sound of the horsemen and the archers,The entire city flees.They enter into the thickets,And they climb the rocks.Every city is abandoned,And no man dwells in them.”30 Now that you are devastated, what will you do?You used to clothe yourself with scarlet,To deck yourself with gold ornaments,And to enlarge your eyes with black paint.But it is in vain that you beautified yourself,For those lusting after you have rejected you;They are now seeking to take your life.31 For I have heard the sound like that of a sick woman,The distress like that of a woman giving birth to her first child,The voice of the daughter of Zion who keeps gasping for breath.She says as she spreads out her palms:“Woe to me, for I am exhausted because of the killers!”
40 The word that came to Jeremiah from Jehovah after Neb·uʹzar·adʹan the chief of the guard let him go free from Raʹmah. He had taken him there bound with handcuffs, and he was among all the exiles of Jerusalem and of Judah who were being deported to Babylon. 2 Then the chief of the guard took Jeremiah and said to him: “Jehovah your God foretold this calamity against this place, 3 and Jehovah has brought it about just as he said, because you people sinned against Jehovah and did not obey his voice. That is why this has happened to you. 4 Now I am releasing you today from the handcuffs that were on your hands. If it seems good to you to come with me to Babylon, come, and I will look after you. But if you do not want to come with me to Babylon, do not come. See! The entire land is before you. Go wherever you choose.”5 While Jeremiah still had not turned back, Neb·uʹzar·adʹan said: “Return to Ged·a·liʹah the son of A·hiʹkam the son of Shaʹphan, whom the king of Babylon has appointed over the cities of Judah, and stay with him among the people; or go wherever you choose.”The chief of the guard then gave him a food allowance and a gift and let him go. 6 So Jeremiah went to Ged·a·liʹah the son of A·hiʹkam at Mizʹpah and stayed with him among the people who were left in the land.7 In time all the army chiefs who were in the field with their men heard that the king of Babylon had appointed Ged·a·liʹah the son of A·hiʹkam over the land and that he had appointed him over the men, women, and children from the poor people of the land who had not been deported to Babylon. 8 So they came to Ged·a·liʹah at Mizʹpah. They were Ishʹma·el the son of Neth·a·niʹah, Jo·haʹnan and Jonʹa·than the sons of Ka·reʹah, Se·raiʹah the son of Tan·huʹmeth, the sons of Eʹphai the Ne·tophʹa·thite, and Jez·a·niʹah the son of the Ma·acʹa·thite, together with their men. 9 Ged·a·liʹah the son of A·hiʹkam the son of Shaʹphan swore an oath to them and to their men, saying: “Do not be afraid of serving the Chal·deʹans. Live in the land and serve the king of Babylon, and it will go well with you. 10 As for me, I will stay in Mizʹpah to represent you to the Chal·deʹans who come to us. But you should gather wine, summer fruits, and oil and put them in your storage containers and settle in the cities that you have taken over.”11 And all the Jews who were in Moʹab, Amʹmon, and Eʹdom, as well as those who were in all the other lands, also heard that the king of Babylon had let a remnant stay in Judah and that he had appointed over them Ged·a·liʹah the son of A·hiʹkam the son of Shaʹphan. 12 So all the Jews began returning from all the places to which they had been dispersed, and they came into the land of Judah, to Ged·a·liʹah at Mizʹpah. And they gathered wine and summer fruits in very great quantity.13 Jo·haʹnan the son of Ka·reʹah and all the army chiefs who were in the field came to Ged·a·liʹah at Mizʹpah. 14 They said to him: “Do you not know that Baʹa·lis, the king of the Amʹmon·ites, has sent Ishʹma·el the son of Neth·a·niʹah to kill you?” But Ged·a·liʹah the son of A·hiʹkam did not believe them.15 Then Jo·haʹnan the son of Ka·reʹah secretly told Ged·a·liʹah in Mizʹpah: “I want to go and strike down Ishʹma·el the son of Neth·a·niʹah, and no one will know. Why should he kill you, and why should all the people of Judah who have gathered to you be scattered and the remnant of Judah perish?” 16 But Ged·a·liʹah the son of A·hiʹkam said to Jo·haʹnan the son of Ka·reʹah: “Do not do this, for what you are saying concerning Ishʹma·el is a lie.”
41 In the seventh month Ishʹma·el son of Neth·a·niʹah son of E·lishʹa·ma, who was of the royal line and one of the principal men of the king, came with ten other men to Ged·a·liʹah the son of A·hiʹkam at Mizʹpah. As they were eating a meal together in Mizʹpah, 2 Ishʹma·el the son of Neth·a·niʹah and the ten men who were with him rose up and struck down Ged·a·liʹah the son of A·hiʹkam the son of Shaʹphan with the sword. So he put to death the one whom the king of Babylon had appointed over the land. 3 Ishʹma·el also struck down all the Jews who were with Ged·a·liʹah in Mizʹpah, as well as the Chal·deʹan soldiers who were there.4 On the second day after Ged·a·liʹah had been put to death, before anyone knew about it, 5 there came 80 men from Sheʹchem, from Shiʹloh, and from Sa·marʹi·a. Their beards were shaved off, their garments were ripped apart, they had cut themselves, and they had grain offerings and frankincense in their hand to bring to the house of Jehovah. 6 So Ishʹma·el the son of Neth·a·niʹah went out from Mizʹpah to meet them, weeping as he walked along. When he encountered them, he said to them: “Come to Ged·a·liʹah the son of A·hiʹkam.” 7 But when they came into the city, Ishʹma·el the son of Neth·a·niʹah and his men slaughtered them and threw them into the cistern.8 But there were ten men among them who said to Ishʹma·el: “Do not put us to death, for we have hidden stores of wheat, barley, oil, and honey in the field.” So he refrained from putting them to death along with their brothers. 9 Now Ishʹma·el threw all the carcasses of the men he had killed into a great cistern, the one that King Aʹsa had made because of King Baʹa·sha of Israel. This was the cistern that Ishʹma·el the son of Neth·a·niʹah filled with the slain men.10 Ishʹma·el took captive all the rest of the people in Mizʹpah, including the daughters of the king and all the people left in Mizʹpah, whom Neb·uʹzar·adʹan the chief of the guard had put in the custody of Ged·a·liʹah the son of A·hiʹkam. Ishʹma·el the son of Neth·a·niʹah took them captive and went off to cross over to the Amʹmon·ites.11 When Jo·haʹnan the son of Ka·reʹah and all the army chiefs who were with him heard about all the evil that Ishʹma·el the son of Neth·a·niʹah had done, 12 they took all the men and went off to fight against Ishʹma·el the son of Neth·a·niʹah, and they found him by the great waters in Gibʹe·on.13 All the people who were with Ishʹma·el rejoiced when they saw Jo·haʹnan the son of Ka·reʹah and all the army chiefs with him. 14 Then all the people whom Ishʹma·el had taken captive from Mizʹpah turned around and went back with Jo·haʹnan the son of Ka·reʹah. 15 But Ishʹma·el the son of Neth·a·niʹah and eight of his men escaped from Jo·haʹnan and went to the Amʹmon·ites.16 Jo·haʹnan the son of Ka·reʹah and all the army chiefs who were with him took with them the rest of the people from Mizʹpah, those whom they had rescued from Ishʹma·el the son of Neth·a·niʹah after he had struck down Ged·a·liʹah the son of A·hiʹkam. They brought the men, the soldiers, the women, the children, and the court officials back from Gibʹe·on. 17 So they went and stayed in the lodging place of Chimʹham next to Bethʹle·hem, intending to go on into Egypt 18 because of the Chal·deʹans. For they had become afraid of them, since Ishʹma·el the son of Neth·a·niʹah had struck down Ged·a·liʹah the son of A·hiʹkam, whom the king of Babylon had appointed over the land.
42 Then all the army chiefs, and Jo·haʹnan the son of Ka·reʹah, Jez·a·niʹah the son of Ho·shaiʹah, and all the people, from the least to the greatest, approached 2 and said to Jeremiah the prophet: “Hear, please, our request for favor, and pray in our behalf to Jehovah your God, in behalf of all this remnant, for just a few of many are left, as you can see. 3 May Jehovah your God tell us the way we should walk and what we should do.”4 Jeremiah the prophet replied to them: “I have heard you, and I am praying to Jehovah your God according to your request; and every word that Jehovah answers you, I will tell you. I will not hold back a word from you.”5 They replied to Jeremiah: “May Jehovah be a true and faithful witness against us if we do not do exactly as Jehovah your God instructs us through you. 6 Whether good or bad, we will obey the voice of Jehovah our God, to whom we are sending you, so that it may go well with us because we obey the voice of Jehovah our God.”7 Now ten days later the word of Jehovah came to Jeremiah. 8 So he called for Jo·haʹnan the son of Ka·reʹah and for all the army chiefs who were with him and for all the people, from the least to the greatest. 9 He said to them: “This is what Jehovah the God of Israel says, to whom you sent me to present your request for favor before him: 10 ‘If you will indeed remain in this land, then I will build you up and not tear you down, and I will plant you and not uproot you, for I will feel regret over the calamity I have caused you. 11 Do not be afraid because of the king of Babylon, whom you fear.’“‘Do not be afraid because of him,’ declares Jehovah, ‘for I am with you, to save you and to rescue you out of his hand. 12 And I will show you mercy, and he will have mercy on you and return you to your own land.13 “‘But if you say, “No, we will not remain in this land!” and you disobey the voice of Jehovah your God 14 by saying, “No, we will go instead to the land of Egypt, where we will not see war or hear the sound of the horn or hunger for bread; there is where we will live,” 15 then hear the word of Jehovah, O remnant of Judah. This is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says: “If you are absolutely determined to go to Egypt and you go there to reside, 16 then the very sword you are afraid of will catch up with you there in the land of Egypt, and the very famine you fear will follow after you to Egypt, and there you will die. 17 And all the men who are determined to go to Egypt to reside there will die by the sword, by famine, and by pestilence. None of them will survive or escape the calamity that I will bring on them.”’18 “For this is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says: ‘Just as my anger and my wrath were poured out on the inhabitants of Jerusalem, so my wrath will be poured out on you if you go to Egypt, and you will become a curse, an object of horror, a malediction, and a reproach, and you will never again see this place.’19 “Jehovah has spoken against you, O remnant of Judah. Do not go to Egypt. You should know for a certainty that I have warned you today 20 that your error will cost you your lives. For you sent me to Jehovah your God, saying, ‘Pray in our behalf to Jehovah our God, and tell us everything that Jehovah our God says, and we will do it.’ 21 And I told you today, but you will not obey the voice of Jehovah your God or do anything he sent me to tell you. 22 Therefore, know for a certainty that by the sword, by famine, and by pestilence you will die in the place where you desire to go and reside.”
43 When Jeremiah had finished speaking to all the people all these words from Jehovah their God, every single word that Jehovah their God had sent him to tell them, 2 Az·a·riʹah the son of Ho·shaiʹah, Jo·haʹnan the son of Ka·reʹah, and all the presumptuous men said to Jeremiah: “What you are saying is a lie! Jehovah our God has not sent you to say, ‘Do not go to Egypt to reside there.’ 3 But Barʹuch the son of Ne·riʹah is inciting you against us to hand us over to the Chal·deʹans, to put us to death or to take us into exile in Babylon.”4 So Jo·haʹnan the son of Ka·reʹah and all the army chiefs and all the people disobeyed the voice of Jehovah to remain in the land of Judah. 5 Instead, Jo·haʹnan the son of Ka·reʹah and all the army chiefs took with them all the remnant of Judah who had returned to reside in the land of Judah from all the nations where they had been dispersed. 6 They took the men, the women, the children, the daughters of the king, and everyone whom Neb·uʹzar·adʹan the chief of the guard had left with Ged·a·liʹah the son of A·hiʹkam the son of Shaʹphan, as well as Jeremiah the prophet and Barʹuch the son of Ne·riʹah. 7 And they went into the land of Egypt, for they did not obey the voice of Jehovah, and they went as far as Tahʹpan·hes.8 Then the word of Jehovah came to Jeremiah in Tahʹpan·hes, saying: 9 “Take in your hand large stones, and hide them in the mortar in the brick terrace at the entrance of the house of Pharʹaoh in Tahʹpan·hes, with the Jewish men looking on. 10 Then say to them, ‘This is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says: “Here I am sending for Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar the king of Babylon, my servant, and I will place his throne right above these stones that I have hidden, and he will extend his royal tent over them. 11 And he will come in and strike the land of Egypt. Whoever is meant for deadly plague will be for deadly plague, and whoever is meant for captivity will be for captivity, and whoever is meant for the sword will be for the sword. 12 And I will set the houses of the gods of Egypt on fire, and he will burn them and lead them captive. He will wrap the land of Egypt around himself just as a shepherd wraps himself in his garment, and he will depart from there in peace. 13 And he will break to pieces the pillars of Beth-sheʹmesh in the land of Egypt, and he will burn the houses of the gods of Egypt with fire.”’”
44 The word that came to Jeremiah for all the Jews living in the land of Egypt, those living in Migʹdol, Tahʹpan·hes, Noph, and the land of Pathʹros, saying: 2 “This is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says, ‘You have seen all the calamity that I brought on Jerusalem and on all the cities of Judah, and today they are in ruins, without an inhabitant. 3 It is because of the evil things that they did to offend me by going and making sacrifices and serving other gods whom they had not known, neither you nor your forefathers. 4 I kept sending all my servants the prophets to you, sending them again and again, saying: “Please do not do this detestable thing that I hate.” 5 But they did not listen or incline their ear to turn back from their evil by not making sacrifices to other gods. 6 So my wrath and my anger were poured out and burned in the cities of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem, and they became a ruin and a wasteland, as they are today.’7 “And now this is what Jehovah, the God of armies, the God of Israel, says, ‘Why are you causing a great calamity to yourselves, so that every man and woman, child and infant, will perish from Judah, leaving you without a remnant? 8 Why should you offend me with the works of your hands by sacrificing to other gods in the land of Egypt where you have gone to reside? You will perish and become an object of cursing and a reproach among all the nations of the earth. 9 Have you forgotten the wicked deeds of your forefathers and the wicked deeds of the kings of Judah and the wicked deeds of their wives, as well as your own wicked deeds and the wicked deeds of your wives, that were done in the land of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem? 10 Down to this day they have not humbled themselves, they have shown no fear, nor have they walked in my law and my statutes that I set before you and your forefathers.’11 “Therefore this is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says, ‘Here I am determined to bring calamity on you, to destroy all Judah. 12 And I will take the remnant of Judah who were determined to go to the land of Egypt to reside there, and they will all perish in the land of Egypt. They will fall by the sword and perish by the famine; from the least to the greatest, they will die by the sword and by famine. And they will become a curse, an object of horror, a malediction, and a reproach. 13 I will punish those dwelling in the land of Egypt just as I punished Jerusalem, with the sword, with famine, and with pestilence. 14 And the remnant of Judah who have gone to reside in the land of Egypt will not escape or survive to return to the land of Judah. They will long to return and dwell there, but they will not return, except for a few escapees.’”15 All the men who knew that their wives had been making sacrifices to other gods and all the wives who were standing there, who formed a large group, and all the people who were living in the land of Egypt, in Pathʹros, answered Jeremiah: 16 “We will not listen to the word that you have spoken to us in the name of Jehovah. 17 Instead, we will surely carry out every word that our mouths have spoken, to make sacrifices to the Queen of Heaven and to pour out drink offerings to her, just as we, our forefathers, our kings, and our princes did in the cities of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem when we were satisfied with bread and were well-off, when we saw no calamity at all. 18 From the time we quit making sacrifices to the Queen of Heaven and pouring out drink offerings to her, we have lacked everything and have perished by the sword and by the famine.”19 The women added: “And when we were making sacrifices to the Queen of Heaven and pouring out drink offerings to her, was it without the consent of our husbands that we made sacrificial cakes shaped in her image and we poured out drink offerings to her?”20 Then Jeremiah said to all the people, to the men and their wives and to all the people who were speaking to him: 21 “The sacrifices that you, your forefathers, your kings, your princes, and the people of the land made in the cities of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem—Jehovah remembered them and they came up into his heart! 22 Finally Jehovah could no longer put up with your evil practices and the detestable things you had done, and your land became a devastated place, an object of horror and cursing, without an inhabitant, as it is today. 23 It is because you have made these sacrifices and because you have sinned against Jehovah by not obeying the voice of Jehovah and following his law, his statutes, and his reminders that this calamity has come upon you, as is the case today.”24 Jeremiah continued to say to all the people and to all the women: “Hear the word of Jehovah, all you of Judah who are in the land of Egypt. 25 This is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says, ‘What you and your wives have spoken with your mouths, you have fulfilled with your hands, for you said: “We will surely carry out our vows to make sacrifices to the Queen of Heaven and to pour out drink offerings to her.” You women will surely carry out your vows and perform your vows.’26 “Therefore hear the word of Jehovah, all you of Judah who are living in the land of Egypt: ‘“Here I swear by my own great name,” says Jehovah, “that my name will no longer be called on in an oath by any man of Judah in all the land of Egypt who says, ‘As surely as the Sovereign Lord Jehovah is alive!’ 27 Now I am watching over them to bring calamity and not something good; all the men of Judah in the land of Egypt will perish by the sword and by the famine, until they cease to exist. 28 Only a few will escape the sword and return from the land of Egypt to the land of Judah. Then all the remnant of Judah who came to the land of Egypt to reside there will know whose word has come true, mine or theirs!”’”29 “‘And this is the sign for you,’ declares Jehovah, ‘that I will punish you in this place, so that you will know that my words promising calamity against you will surely come true. 30 This is what Jehovah says: “Here I am giving Pharʹaoh Hophʹra, the king of Egypt, into the hand of his enemies and of those seeking to take his life, just as I gave King Zed·e·kiʹah of Judah into the hand of King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon, who was his enemy and who sought to take his life.”’”
45 This is the word that Jeremiah the prophet spoke to Barʹuch the son of Ne·riʹah when he wrote in a book these words dictated by Jeremiah in the fourth year of Je·hoiʹa·kim son of Jo·siʹah, the king of Judah:2 “This is what Jehovah the God of Israel says concerning you, Barʹuch, 3 ‘You have said: “Woe to me, for Jehovah has added grief to my pain! I am weary from my groaning, and I have found no resting-place.”’4 “You should say to him, ‘This is what Jehovah says: “Look! What I have built up I am tearing down, and what I have planted I am uprooting—the entire land. 5 But you are seeking great things for yourself. Stop seeking such things.”’“‘For I am about to bring a calamity on all flesh,’ declares Jehovah, ‘and wherever you may go, I will grant you your life as a spoil.’”
46 This is the word of Jehovah to Jeremiah the prophet concerning the nations: 2 For Egypt, concerning the army of Pharʹaoh Neʹcho the king of Egypt, who was along the Eu·phraʹtes River and was defeated at Carʹche·mish by King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon in the fourth year of Je·hoiʹa·kim son of Jo·siʹah, the king of Judah: 3 “Prepare your bucklers and large shields,And advance to the battle. 4 Harness the horses and mount, you horsemen.Take your positions and put on your helmets.Polish the lances and put on your coats of mail. 5 ‘Why do I see them terror-stricken?They are retreating, their warriors are crushed.They have fled in panic, their warriors have not turned around.There is terror all around,’ declares Jehovah. 6 ‘The swift cannot flee, and the warriors cannot escape.In the north, by the bank of the Eu·phraʹtes River,They have stumbled and fallen.’ 7 Who is this coming up like the Nile River,Like the rivers of surging waters? 8 Egypt comes up just like the Nile River,Like rivers of surging waters,And it says, ‘I will go up and cover the earth.I will destroy the city and those inhabiting it.’ 9 Go up, you horses!Drive madly, you chariots!Let the warriors advance,Cush and Put, who handle the shield,And the Luʹdim, who handle and bend the bow.10 “That day belongs to the Sovereign Lord, Jehovah of armies, the day of vengeance for taking revenge on his adversaries. And the sword will devour and satisfy itself and take its fill of their blood, for the Sovereign Lord, Jehovah of armies, has a sacrifice in the land of the north by the Eu·phraʹtes River.11 Go up to Gilʹe·ad to get balsam,O virgin daughter of Egypt.In vain you have multiplied your remedies,For there is no cure for you.12 The nations have heard your dishonor,And your outcry has filled the land.For warrior stumbles against warrior,And they both fall down together.”13 This is the word that Jehovah spoke to Jeremiah the prophet regarding the coming of King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon to strike down the land of Egypt:14 “Declare it in Egypt, proclaim it in Migʹdol.Proclaim it in Noph and in Tahʹpan·hes.Say, ‘Take your positions and prepare yourselves,For a sword will devour all around you.15 Why have your powerful men been swept away?They did not stand their ground,For Jehovah has pushed them down.16 In great numbers they are stumbling and falling.They are saying to one another:“Get up! Let us return to our people and our homelandBecause of the cruel sword.”’17 There they have proclaimed,‘Pharʹaoh king of Egypt is just a meaningless noiseWho has let the opportunity pass by.’18 ‘As surely as I am alive,’ declares the King, whose name is Jehovah of armies,‘He will come in like Taʹbor among the mountainsAnd like Carʹmel by the sea.19 Prepare your baggage for exile,O daughter inhabiting Egypt.For Noph will become an object of horror;It will be set afire and left without an inhabitant.20 Egypt is like a good-looking heifer,But stinging flies will come against her from the north.21 Even her hired soldiers in her midst are like fattened calves,But they have also turned back and fled together.They could not stand their ground,For the day of their disaster has come upon them,Their time of reckoning.’22 ‘Her sound is like that of a slithering serpent,For they come after her in force, with axes,Like men cutting down trees.23 They will cut down her forest,’ declares Jehovah, ‘though it seemed impenetrable.For they are more numerous than locusts, without number.24 The daughter of Egypt will be put to shame.She will be handed over to the people of the north.’25 “Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says: ‘Now I am turning my attention to Aʹmon from No, to Pharʹaoh, to Egypt, to her gods, and to her kings—yes, to Pharʹaoh and all those trusting in him.’26 “‘And I will hand them over to those seeking to take their life, to King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon and his servants. But afterward she will be inhabited as in times past,’ declares Jehovah.27 ‘As for you, do not be afraid, my servant Jacob,And do not be terrified, O Israel.For I will save you from far awayAnd your offspring from the land of their captivity.Jacob will return and be calm and undisturbed,With no one to make them afraid.28 So do not be afraid, my servant Jacob,’ declares Jehovah, ‘for I am with you.I will make an extermination among all the nations where I dispersed you,But you I will not exterminate.I will discipline you to the proper degree,But I will by no means leave you unpunished.’”
47 This is the word of Jehovah to Jeremiah the prophet concerning the Phi·lisʹtines, before Pharʹaoh struck down Gazʹa. 2 This is what Jehovah says:“Look! Waters are coming from the north.They will become a flooding torrent.And they will flood the land and everything in it,The city and those inhabiting it.The men will cry out,And everyone dwelling in the land will wail. 3 At the sound of the pounding hooves of his stallions,At the rattling of his war chariotsAnd the rumbling of his wheels,Fathers will not even turn around for their sons,For their hands fall limp, 4 Because the day that is coming will destroy all the Phi·lisʹtines;It will cut off from Tyre and Siʹdon every remaining ally.For Jehovah will destroy the Phi·lisʹtines,Who are the remaining ones from the island of Caphʹtor. 5 Baldness will come to Gazʹa.Ashʹke·lon has been silenced.O remnant of their valley plain,How long will you keep making cuts on yourself? 6 Ah! The sword of Jehovah!How long will you not be quiet?Go back into your sheath.Take your rest and be silent. 7 How can it be quietWhen Jehovah has given it a command?Against Ashʹke·lon and the seacoast,There is where he has assigned it.”
48 For Moʹab, this is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says:“Woe to Neʹbo, for she has been destroyed!Kir·i·a·thaʹim has been put to shame and captured.The secure refuge has been put to shame and shattered. 2 They no longer praise Moʹab.In Heshʹbon they have plotted her downfall:‘Come, let us put an end to her as a nation.’You too, O Madʹmen, should keep silent,For the sword is following you. 3 There is the sound of an outcry from Hor·o·naʹim,Of destruction and great collapse. 4 Moʹab has been broken down.Her little ones cry out. 5 On the ascent of Luʹhith they weep continually as they climb.And on the way down from Hor·o·naʹim they hear cries of distress over the catastrophe. 6 Flee, escape for your lives!You must become like a juniper tree in the wilderness. 7 Because you trust in your works and in your treasures,You will also be captured.And Cheʹmosh will go into exile,Together with his priests and his princes. 8 The destroyer will come in on every city,And no city will escape.The valley will perish,And the level land will be annihilated, just as Jehovah has said. 9 Set up a marker for Moʹab,For as she falls into ruins she will flee,And her cities will become an object of horror,Without an inhabitant.10 Cursed is the one who carries out the mission of Jehovah neglectfully!Cursed is the one who holds back his sword from bloodshed!11 The Moʹab·ites have been undisturbed since their youth,Like wine that has settled on the dregs.They have not been poured from one vessel into another,And they have never gone into exile.That is why their taste has remained the same,And their aroma has not changed.12 “‘Therefore look! the days are coming,’ declares Jehovah, ‘when I will send men to overturn them. They will turn them over and empty out their vessels, and they will smash their large jars to pieces. 13 And the Moʹab·ites will be ashamed of Cheʹmosh, just as the house of Israel is ashamed of Bethʹel, which was their confidence.14 How dare you say: “We are mighty warriors, ready for battle”?’15 ‘Moʹab has been destroyed,Her cities have been invaded,And their choicest young men have been slaughtered,’Declares the King, whose name is Jehovah of armies.16 The disaster on the Moʹab·ites is coming soon,And their downfall is approaching quickly.17 All those around them will have to sympathize with them,All those knowing their name.Tell them: ‘O how the mighty rod has been broken, the staff of beauty!’18 Come down from your glory,And sit down in thirst, O daughter inhabiting Diʹbon,For the destroyer of Moʹab has come against you,And he will bring your fortified places to ruin.19 Stand by the road and watch, inhabitant of A·roʹer.Ask the man fleeing and the woman escaping, ‘What has happened?’20 Moʹab has been put to shame and struck with terror.Wail and cry out.Proclaim in Arʹnon that Moʹab has been destroyed.21 “Judgment has come to the level land, against Hoʹlon, Jaʹhaz, and Mephʹa·ath; 22 against Diʹbon, Neʹbo, and Beth-dib·la·thaʹim; 23 against Kir·i·a·thaʹim, Beth-gaʹmul, and Beth-meʹon; 24 against Keʹri·oth and Bozʹrah; and against all the cities of the land of Moʹab, those far and near.25 ‘The strength of Moʹab has been cut down;His arm has been broken,’ declares Jehovah.26 ‘Make him drunk, for he has exalted himself against Jehovah.Moʹab wallows in his vomit,And he is an object of ridicule.27 Was Israel not an object of ridicule to you?Was he found among thieves,So that you should shake your head and speak against him?28 Leave the cities and live on the crag, inhabitants of Moʹab,And become like a dove that nests along the sides of the gorge.’”29 “We have heard about the pride of Moʹab—he is very haughty—About his arrogance, his pride, his haughtiness, and the loftiness of his heart.”30 “‘I know his fury,’ declares Jehovah,‘But his empty talk will come to nothing.They will do nothing.31 That is why I will wail over Moʹab,For all Moʹab I will cry outAnd moan for the men of Kir-heʹres.32 With more than the weeping for Jaʹzer,I will weep for you, O vine of Sibʹmah.Your flourishing shoots have crossed the sea.To the sea, to Jaʹzer, they have reached.Upon your summer fruit and your grape harvestThe destroyer has descended.33 Rejoicing and joyfulness have been removed from the orchardAnd from the land of Moʹab.I have caused the wine to stop flowing from the winepress.No one will be treading with shouts of joy.The shouting will be different shouting.’”34 “‘There is an outcry from Heshʹbon clear to E·le·aʹleh.They raise their voice clear to Jaʹhaz,From Zoʹar to Hor·o·naʹim to Egʹlath-she·liʹshi·yah.Even the waters of Nimʹrim will become desolate.35 I will cause to cease from Moʹab,’ declares Jehovah,‘The one bringing an offering on the high placeAnd the one making sacrifices to his god.36 That is why my heart will moan for Moʹab like a flute,And my heart will moan for the men of Kir-heʹres like a flute.For the wealth he has produced will perish.37 For every head is bald,And every beard is clipped.There are cuts on every hand,And there is sackcloth on their hips!’”38 “‘On all the roofs of MoʹabAnd in all her public squares,There is nothing but wailing.For I have broken MoʹabLike a discarded jar,’ declares Jehovah.39 ‘How she is terrified! Wail!How Moʹab has turned his back in shame!Moʹab has become an object of ridicule,Something terrifying to all those around him.’”40 “For this is what Jehovah says:‘Look! Just like an eagle that swoops down,He will spread his wings over Moʹab.41 The towns will be captured,And her strongholds will be seized.In that day the heart of Moʹab’s warriorsWill be like the heart of a woman in childbirth.’”42 “‘And Moʹab will be annihilated from being a people,For it is against Jehovah that he has exalted himself.43 Terror and the pit and the trap are before you,O inhabitant of Moʹab,’ declares Jehovah.44 ‘Anyone fleeing the terror will fall into the pit,And anyone coming up from the pit will be caught in the trap.’‘For I will bring on Moʹab the year of their punishment,’ declares Jehovah.45 ‘In the shadow of Heshʹbon, those fleeing stand powerless.For a fire will come out of HeshʹbonAnd a flame from within Siʹhon.It will consume the forehead of MoʹabAnd the skull of the sons of tumult.’46 ‘Woe to you, O Moʹab!The people of Cheʹmosh have perished.For your sons have been taken captive,And your daughters have gone into exile.47 But I will gather the captives of Moʹab in the final part of the days,’ declares Jehovah.‘Down to this point is the judgment on Moʹab.’”
49 For the Amʹmon·ites, this is what Jehovah says:“Does Israel have no sons?Does he have no heir?Why has Malʹcam taken possession of Gad?And why are his people living in Israel’s cities?” 2 “‘Therefore look! the days are coming,’ declares Jehovah,‘When I will cause the alarm signal of war to be heard against Rabʹbah of the Amʹmon·ites.She will become a desolate mound,And her dependent towns will be set on fire.’‘And Israel will take possession of those who dispossessed him,’ says Jehovah. 3 ‘Wail, O Heshʹbon, for Aʹi has been destroyed!Cry out, O dependent towns of Rabʹbah.Put on sackcloth.Wail and rove about among the stone pens,For Malʹcam will go into exile,Together with his priests and his princes. 4 Why do you brag about the valleys,About your flowing plain, O unfaithful daughter,Who trusts in her treasuresAnd who says: “Who will come against me?”’” 5 “‘Here I am bringing something dreadful on you,’ declares the Sovereign Lord, Jehovah of armies,‘From all those around you.You will be dispersed in every direction,And no one will gather those who flee.’” 6 “‘But afterward I will gather the captives of the Amʹmon·ites,’ declares Jehovah.”7 For Eʹdom, this is what Jehovah of armies says:“Is there no longer any wisdom in Teʹman?Has good advice perished from those with understanding?Has their wisdom rotted? 8 Flee, turn back!Go and dwell down in the depths, O inhabitants of Deʹdan!For I will bring disaster on EʹsauWhen the time comes to turn my attention to him. 9 If grape gatherers came in to you,Would they not leave some behind for gleaning?If thieves came in by night,They would cause only as much ruin as they wanted.10 But I will strip Eʹsau bare.I will uncover his places of concealment,So that he cannot hide.His children and his brothers and his neighbors will all be destroyed,And he will be no more.11 Leave your fatherless children,And I will preserve them alive,And your widows will trust in me.”12 For this is what Jehovah says: “Look! If those not sentenced to drink the cup must drink it, should you be left completely unpunished? You will not be left unpunished, for you must drink it.”13 “For by myself I have sworn,” declares Jehovah, “that Bozʹrah will become an object of horror, a reproach, a devastation, and a curse; and all her cities will become perpetual ruins.”14 I have heard a report from Jehovah,An envoy has been sent among the nations, saying:“Gather yourselves together and come against her;Prepare for battle.”15 “For look! I have made you insignificant among the nations,Despised among men.16 The shuddering you caused has deceived you,The presumptuousness of your heart,O you who reside in the retreats of the crag,Occupying the highest hill.Although you build your nest high up like an eagle,I will bring you down from there,” declares Jehovah.17 “And Eʹdom must become an object of horror. Everyone passing along by her will stare in horror and whistle on account of all her plagues. 18 Just as in the overthrow of Sodʹom and Go·morʹrah and of their neighboring towns,” Jehovah says, “no one will dwell there, and no man will settle there.19 “Look! Someone will come up against the secure pastures like a lion from the dense thickets along the Jordan, but in a moment I will make him run away from her. And I will appoint over her the chosen one. For who is like me, and who will challenge me? What shepherd can stand before me? 20 Therefore hear, O men, the decision that Jehovah has made against Eʹdom and what he has thought out against the inhabitants of Teʹman:Surely the little ones of the flock will be dragged away.He will make their dwelling place desolate because of them.21 At the sound of their falling, the earth has quaked.There is an outcry!The sound has been heard as far as the Red Sea.22 Look! Just like an eagle he will ascend and swoop down,And he will spread out his wings over Bozʹrah.In that day the heart of the warriors of EʹdomWill become like the heart of a woman in childbirth.”23 For Damascus:“Haʹmath and Arʹpad have been put to shame,For they have heard a bad report.They melt in fear.There is anxiety in the sea that cannot be calmed.24 Damascus has lost courage.She has turned to flee, but panic has seized her.Distress and pain have taken hold of her,Like a woman who is giving birth.25 How is it that the city of praise has not been abandoned,The town of exultation?26 For her young men will fall in her public squares,And all the soldiers will perish in that day,” declares Jehovah of armies.27 “I will set the wall of Damascus on fire,And it will consume the fortified towers of Ben-haʹdad.”28 For Keʹdar and the kingdoms of Haʹzor, which King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon struck down, this is what Jehovah says:“Rise up, go up to Keʹdar,And destroy the sons of the East.29 Their tents and their flocks will be taken,Their tent cloths and all their goods.Their camels will be carried off,And they will cry out to them, ‘Terror is all around!’”30 “Flee, go far away!Go and dwell down in the depths, O inhabitants of Haʹzor,” declares Jehovah.“For King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon has devised a strategy against you,And he has thought out a plan against you.”31 “Rise up, go up against the nation that is at peace,Dwelling in security!” declares Jehovah.“It has no doors or bars; they live in isolation.32 Their camels will become plunder,And their abundant livestock a spoil.I will scatter them to every wind,Those who clip their hair at the temples,And I will bring their disaster from every direction,” declares Jehovah.33 “And Haʹzor will become a lair of jackals,A perpetual desolation.No one will dwell there,And no man will settle in her.”34 This is the word of Jehovah that came to Jeremiah the prophet concerning Eʹlam in the beginning of the reign of King Zed·e·kiʹah of Judah: 35 “This is what Jehovah of armies says, ‘Here I am breaking the bow of Eʹlam, the source of their mightiness. 36 I will bring in on Eʹlam the four winds from the four extremities of the heavens, and I will scatter them to all these winds. There will not be a nation to which the dispersed ones of Eʹlam will not go.’”37 “I will shatter the Eʹlam·ites before their enemies and before those seeking to take their life; and I will bring calamity on them, my burning anger,” declares Jehovah. “And I will send the sword after them until I have exterminated them.”38 “And I will set my throne in Eʹlam, and I will destroy from there the king and the princes,” declares Jehovah.39 “But in the final part of the days, I will gather the captives of Eʹlam,” declares Jehovah.
5 Roam the streets of Jerusalem.Look around and take note.Search her public squares to seeWhether you can find a man who acts with justice,One who seeks to be faithful,And I will forgive her. 2 Even if they say: “As surely as Jehovah is alive!”They would still swear to what is false. 3 O Jehovah, do your eyes not look for faithfulness?You struck them, but it made no impact on them.You exterminated them, but they refused to accept discipline.They made their faces harder than a rock,And they refused to turn around. 4 But I said to myself: “Surely these must be the lowly.They act foolishly, for they do not know the way of Jehovah,The judgment of their God. 5 I will go to the prominent men and speak with them,For they must have taken note of the way of Jehovah,The judgment of their God.But they had all broken the yokeAnd torn apart the restraints.” 6 That is why a lion of the forest attacks them,A wolf of the desert plains keeps ravaging them,A leopard lies awake at their cities.Everyone going out from them is torn to pieces.For their transgressions are many;Their acts of unfaithfulness are numerous. 7 How can I forgive you for this?Your sons have abandoned me,And they swear by what is no God.I satisfied their needs,But they kept committing adultery,And they flocked to the house of a prostitute. 8 They are like eager, lustful horses,Each neighing after another man’s wife. 9 “Should I not call them to account for these things?” declares Jehovah.“Should I not avenge myself on such a nation?”10 “Come up against her vineyard terraces and bring ruin,But do not make a complete extermination.Take away her spreading shoots,For they do not belong to Jehovah.11 For the house of Israel and the house of JudahHave been utterly treacherous with me,” declares Jehovah.12 “They have denied Jehovah, and they keep saying,‘He will do nothing.No calamity will come upon us;We will not see sword or famine.’13 The prophets are full of wind,And the word is not in them.Let this happen to them!”14 Therefore this is what Jehovah, the God of armies, says:“Because these men are saying this,Here I am making my words a fire in your mouth,And this people is the wood,And it will consume them.”15 “Here I am bringing in on you a nation from far away, O house of Israel,” declares Jehovah.“It is an enduring nation.It is an ancient nation,A nation whose language you do not know,And whose speech you cannot understand.16 Their quiver is like an open grave;All of them are warriors.17 They will devour your harvest and your bread.They will devour your sons and your daughters.They will devour your flocks and your herds.They will devour your vines and your fig trees.They will destroy with the sword your fortified cities in which you trust.”18 “But even in those days,” declares Jehovah, “I will not carry out a complete extermination of you. 19 And when they ask, ‘Why has Jehovah our God done all these things to us?’ you should answer them, ‘Just as you abandoned me to serve a foreign god in your land, so you will serve foreigners in a land that is not yours.’”20 Declare this in the house of Jacob,And proclaim it in Judah, saying:21 “Hear this, you foolish and senseless people:They have eyes but cannot see;They have ears but cannot hear.22 ‘Do you not fear me?’ declares Jehovah,‘Should you not tremble before me?It is I who placed the sand as the boundary for the sea,A permanent regulation that it cannot pass over.Although its waves toss, they cannot prevail;Although they roar, they still cannot pass beyond it.23 But this people has a stubborn and rebellious heart;They have turned aside and gone their own way.24 And they do not say in their heart:“Let us now fear Jehovah our God,The One who gives the rain in its season,Both the autumn rain and the spring rain,The One who guards for us the appointed weeks of the harvest.”25 Your own errors have prevented these things from coming;Your own sins have deprived you of what is good.26 For among my people there are wicked men.They keep peering, as when birdcatchers crouch down.They set a deadly trap.It is men whom they catch.27 Like a cage full of birds,So their houses are full of deception.That is why they have become powerful and rich.28 They have grown fat and smooth;They overflow with evil.They do not plead the legal case of the fatherless,That they may gain success;And they deny justice to the poor.’”29 “Should I not call them to account for these things?” declares Jehovah.“Should I not avenge myself on such a nation?30 Something appalling and horrible has occurred in the land:31 The prophets prophesy lies,And the priests dominate by their own authority.And my own people love it that way.But what will you do when the end comes?”
50 The word that Jehovah spoke concerning Babylon, concerning the land of the Chal·deʹans, through Jeremiah the prophet: 2 “Declare it among the nations and proclaim it.Raise a signal and proclaim it.Do not hide anything!Say, ‘Babylon has been captured.Bel has been put to shame.Merʹo·dach has become terrified.Her images have been put to shame.Her disgusting idols have become terrified.’ 3 For a nation has come against her from the north.It makes her land an object of horror;No one is dwelling in her.Both man and beast have taken flight;They have gone away.”4 “In those days and at that time,” declares Jehovah, “the people of Israel and the people of Judah will come together. They will weep as they walk, and together they will seek Jehovah their God. 5 They will ask the way to Zion, with their faces turned in that direction, saying, ‘Come and let us join ourselves to Jehovah in an everlasting covenant that will not be forgotten.’ 6 My people have become a flock of lost sheep. Their own shepherds caused them to stray. They led them away onto the mountains, roaming from mountain to hill. They have forgotten their resting-place. 7 All those finding them have devoured them, and their enemies have said, ‘We are not guilty, because they sinned against Jehovah, against the dwelling place of righteousness and the hope of their forefathers, Jehovah.’” 8 “Flee out of the midst of Babylon,Go out of the land of the Chal·deʹans,And be like the leading animals before the flock. 9 For here I am raising up and bringing against BabylonAn assembly of great nations from the land of the north.They will come against her in battle formation;From there she will be captured.Their arrows are like those of a warriorCausing bereavement of children;They do not come back without results.10 Chal·deʹa will become a spoil.All those taking spoil from her will be fully satisfied,” declares Jehovah.11 “For you kept rejoicing, you kept exultingWhen pillaging my own inheritance.For you kept pawing like a heifer in the grass,And you kept neighing like stallions.12 Your mother has been put to shame.She who gave birth to you has been disappointed.Look! She is the least of the nations,A waterless wilderness and a desert.13 Because of the indignation of Jehovah she will not be inhabited;She will become utterly desolate.Anyone passing by Babylon will stare in horrorAnd whistle because of all her plagues.14 Come against Babylon in battle formation on every side,All you who are bending the bow.Shoot at her, spare no arrow,For it is against Jehovah that she has sinned.15 Shout a war cry against her on every side.She has surrendered.Her pillars have fallen, her walls are torn down,For it is the vengeance of Jehovah.Take your vengeance on her.Do to her just as she has done.16 Cut off the sower from BabylonAnd the one handling the sickle in harvesttime.Because of the cruel sword, each will return to his own people,Each one will flee to his own land.17 “The people of Israel are scattered sheep. Lions have dispersed them. First the king of As·syrʹi·a devoured them; then King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon gnawed on their bones. 18 Therefore this is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says: ‘Here I will deal with the king of Babylon and with his land in the same way that I dealt with the king of As·syrʹi·a. 19 And I will bring Israel back to his pasture, and he will graze on Carʹmel and on Baʹshan, and on the mountains of Eʹphra·im and of Gilʹe·ad he will be satisfied.’”20 “In those days and at that time,” declares Jehovah,“Israel’s guilt will be searched for,But there will be none,And the sins of Judah will not be found,For I will forgive those whom I let remain.”21 “Go up against the land of Mer·a·thaʹim and against the inhabitants of Peʹkod.Let them be massacred and completely destroyed,” declares Jehovah.“Do all that I have commanded you.22 There is the sound of war in the land,A great catastrophe.23 How the forge hammer of all the earth has been cut down and broken!How Babylon has become an object of horror among the nations!24 I have laid a snare for you, and you have been caught, O Babylon,And you did not know it.You were found and captured,For it was Jehovah whom you opposed.25 Jehovah has opened his storehouse,And he brings out the weapons of his indignation.For the Sovereign Lord, Jehovah of armies, has a workIn the land of the Chal·deʹans.26 Come against her from distant places.Open up her granaries.Pile her up like heaps of grain.Destroy her completely.May she have no one left.27 Massacre all her young bulls;Let them go down to the slaughter.Woe to them, for their day has come,Their time of reckoning!28 There is the sound of those fleeing,Those escaping from the land of Babylon,To declare in Zion the vengeance of Jehovah our God,The vengeance for his temple.29 Summon archers against Babylon,All who are bending the bow.Camp all around her; let no one escape.Repay her according to her activity.Do to her just as she has done.For she has acted arrogantly against Jehovah,Against the Holy One of Israel.30 So her young men will fall in her public squares,And all her soldiers will perish in that day,” declares Jehovah.31 “Look! I am against you, O defiant one,” declares the Sovereign Lord, Jehovah of armies,“For your day must come, the time that I will call you to account.32 You, O defiant one, will stumble and fall,With no one to raise you up.And I will set your cities on fire,And it will consume everything around you.”33 This is what Jehovah of armies says:“The people of Israel and Judah are oppressed,And all those taking them captive have held onto them.They have refused to let them go.34 But their Repurchaser is strong.Jehovah of armies is his name.He will surely plead their legal case,In order to give rest to the landAnd to bring agitation to the inhabitants of Babylon.”35 “There is a sword against the Chal·deʹans,” declares Jehovah,“Against the inhabitants of Babylon and against her princes and against her wise ones.36 There is a sword against the empty talkers, and they will act foolishly.There is a sword against her warriors, and they will become terrified.37 There is a sword against their horses and their war chariots,And against all the mixed populations in her midst,And they will become like women.There is a sword against her treasures, and they will be plundered.38 There is a devastation on her waters, and they will be dried up.For it is a land of graven images,And because of their frightful visions they keep acting with madness.39 Therefore, the desert creatures will dwell with the howling animals,And in her the ostriches will dwell.She will never again be inhabited,Nor will she be a place of residence throughout all generations.”40 “Just as with God’s overthrow of Sodʹom and Go·morʹrah and of their neighboring towns,” declares Jehovah, “no one will dwell there, and no man will settle there.41 Look! A people is coming in from the north;A great nation and grand kings will be raised upFrom the remotest parts of the earth.42 Bow and javelin they wield.They are cruel and will show no mercy.Their sound is like the roaring sea,As they ride on their horses.Like one man, they line up in battle formation against you, O daughter of Babylon.43 The king of Babylon has heard the report about them,And his hands drop down.Anguish seizes him,Pain like that of a woman giving birth.44 “Look! Someone will come up against the secure pastures like a lion from the dense thickets along the Jordan, but in a moment I will make them run away from her. And I will appoint over her the chosen one. For who is like me, and who will challenge me? What shepherd can stand before me? 45 Therefore hear, O men, the decision that Jehovah has made against Babylon and what he has thought out against the land of the Chal·deʹans.Surely the little ones of the flock will be dragged away.He will make their dwelling place desolate because of them.46 At the sound of Babylon’s capture, the earth will quake,And an outcry will be heard among the nations.”
51 This is what Jehovah says:“Here I am raising up a destructive windAgainst Babylon and the inhabitants of Leb-kaʹmai. 2 I will send winnowers to Babylon,And they will winnow her and make her land empty;They will come against her on all sides in the day of calamity. 3 Let the archer not bend his bow.And let no one stand up in his coat of mail.Show no compassion for her young men.Devote all her army to destruction. 4 And they will fall slain in the land of the Chal·deʹans,Pierced through in her streets. 5 For Israel and Judah are not widowed from their God, from Jehovah of armies.But their land is full of guilt from the standpoint of the Holy One of Israel. 6 Flee out of the midst of Babylon,And escape for your life.Do not perish because of her error.For it is the time for Jehovah’s vengeance.He is paying her back for what she has done. 7 Babylon has been a golden cup in the hand of Jehovah;She made all the earth drunk.From her wine the nations have drunk;That is why the nations have gone mad. 8 Suddenly Babylon has fallen and is broken.Wail over her!Get balsam for her pain; perhaps she may be healed.” 9 “We tried to heal Babylon, but she could not be healed.Leave her and let us go, each to his own land.For her judgment has reached to the heavens;It is as high as the clouds.10 Jehovah has brought about justice for us.Come, let us recount in Zion the work of Jehovah our God.”11 “Polish the arrows; take up the circular shields.Jehovah has stirred up the spirit of the kings of the Medes,Because he intends to bring Babylon to ruin.For this is the vengeance of Jehovah, the vengeance for his temple.12 Lift up a signal against the walls of Babylon.Strengthen the guard, post the watchmen.Prepare those in ambush.For Jehovah has devised the strategy,And he will carry out what he has promised against the inhabitants of Babylon.”13 “O woman who resides on many waters,With abundant treasures,Your end has come, the limit of your profit-making.14 Jehovah of armies has sworn by himself,‘I will fill you with men, as numerous as locusts,And they will shout in triumph over you.’15 He is the Maker of the earth by his power,The One who established the productive land by his wisdomAnd who stretched out the heavens by his understanding.16 When he makes his voice heard,The waters in the heavens are in turmoil,And he causes clouds to ascend from the ends of the earth.He makes lightning for the rain,And he brings the wind out of his storehouses.17 Every man acts unreasonably and without knowledge.Every metalworker will be put to shame because of the carved image;For his metal image is a falsehood,And there is no spirit in them.18 They are a delusion, a work of mockery.When their day of reckoning comes, they will perish.19 The Share of Jacob is not like these things,For he is the One who formed everything,Even the staff of his inheritance.Jehovah of armies is his name.”20 “You are a war club for me, a weapon for battle,For with you I will smash nations.With you I will bring kingdoms to ruin.21 With you I will smash the horse and its rider.With you I will smash the war chariot and its rider.22 With you I will smash man and woman.With you I will smash old man and boy.With you I will smash young man and woman.23 With you I will smash shepherd and his flock.With you I will smash farmer and his team of animals.With you I will smash governors and deputy rulers.24 And I will repay Babylon and all the inhabitants of Chal·deʹaFor all the evil that they have committed in Zion before your eyes,” declares Jehovah.25 “Here I am against you, O destructive mountain,” declares Jehovah,“You destroyer of the whole earth.I will stretch out my hand against you and roll you down from the cragsAnd make you a burned-out mountain.”26 “People will not take from you a cornerstone or a foundation stone,Because you will become desolate forever,” declares Jehovah.27 “Lift up a signal in the land.Blow a horn among the nations.Appoint the nations against her.Summon against her the kingdoms of Arʹa·rat, Minʹni, and Ashʹke·naz.Commission against her a recruiting officer.Make the horses come up like bristling locusts.28 Appoint against her the nations,The kings of Meʹdi·a, its governors and all its deputy rulersAnd all the lands they rule over.29 And the earth will quake and tremble,For the thoughts of Jehovah against Babylon will be carried outTo make the land of Babylon an object of horror, without an inhabitant.30 The warriors of Babylon have quit fighting.They sit in their strongholds.Their strength has failed.They have become like women.Her homes have been set on fire.Her bars have been broken.31 One courier runs to meet another courier,And one messenger to meet another messenger,To report to the king of Babylon that his city has been captured on every side,32 That the fords have been seized,That the papyrus boats have been burned with fire,And that the soldiers are terrified.”33 For this is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says:“The daughter of Babylon is like a threshing floor.It is the time to tread her down solid.Very soon the time of the harvest will come for her.”34 “King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon has devoured me;He has thrown me into confusion.He has set me down as an empty vessel.He has swallowed me down like a big snake;He has filled his stomach with my fine things.He has rinsed me away.35 ‘May the violence done to me and to my person come upon Babylon!’ says the inhabitant of Zion.‘And let my blood come upon the inhabitants of Chal·deʹa!’ says Jerusalem.”36 Therefore this is what Jehovah says:“Here I am pleading your legal case,And I will execute vengeance for you.I will dry up her sea and make her wells dry.37 And Babylon will become piles of stones,A lair of jackals,An object of horror and something to whistle at,Without an inhabitant.38 All together they will roar just like young lions.They will growl like lion cubs.”39 “When they are inflamed, I will set out their banquet and make them drunk,In order that they may exult;Then they will sleep a lasting sleep,From which they will not wake up,” declares Jehovah.40 “I will bring them down like lambs to the slaughter,Like rams along with the goats.”41 “O how Sheʹshach has been captured,How the Praise of the whole earth has been seized!How Babylon has become an object of horror among the nations!42 The sea has come up over Babylon.By the multitude of its waves she has been covered.43 Her cities have become an object of horror, a waterless land and a desert.A land where no one will live and where no man will pass through.44 I will turn my attention to Bel in Babylon,And I will take out of his mouth what he has swallowed.To him nations will stream no more,And the wall of Babylon will fall.45 Get out of her midst, my people!Escape for your lives from the burning anger of Jehovah!46 Do not be fainthearted or afraid about the report to be heard in the land.In one year the report will come,And the next year another report,Of violence in the land and of ruler against ruler.47 Therefore look! the days are comingWhen I will turn my attention to the graven images of Babylon.All her land will be put to shame,And all her slain will fall in her midst.48 The heavens and the earth and everything in themWill shout joyfully over Babylon,For the destroyers will come to her out of the north,” declares Jehovah.49 “Not only did Babylon cause the slain of Israel to fallBut also at Babylon the slain ones of all the earth have fallen.50 You who escape the sword, keep going, do not stand still!Remember Jehovah from far away,And may Jerusalem come up into your heart.”51 “We have been put to shame, for we have heard taunts.Humiliation has covered our faces,For foreigners have come against the holy places of the house of Jehovah.”52 “Therefore look! the days are coming,” declares Jehovah,“When I will turn my attention to her graven images,And throughout all her land the wounded will groan.”53 “Even if Babylon should ascend to the heavens,Even if she should fortify her towering strongholds,From me her destroyers will come,” declares Jehovah.54 “Listen! There is an outcry from Babylon,The sound of great disaster from the land of the Chal·deʹans,55 For Jehovah is destroying Babylon,He will silence her great voice,And their waves will roar like many waters.The sound of their voice will be heard.56 For the destroyer will come upon Babylon;Her warriors will be captured,Their bows will be shattered,For Jehovah is a God of retribution.He will surely repay.57 I will make her princes and her wise men drunk,Her governors and her deputy rulers and her warriors,And they will sleep a lasting sleep,From which they will not wake up,” declares the King, whose name is Jehovah of armies.58 This is what Jehovah of armies says:“The wall of Babylon, though broad, will be completely demolished,And her gates, though high, will be set on fire.The peoples will toil for nothing;The nations will weary themselves just to feed the fire.”59 This is the word that Jeremiah the prophet gave as a command to Se·raiʹah son of Ne·riʹah son of Mah·seiʹah when he went with King Zed·e·kiʹah of Judah to Babylon in the fourth year of his reign; Se·raiʹah was the quartermaster. 60 Jeremiah wrote in one book all the calamity that would come upon Babylon, all these words written against Babylon. 61 Furthermore, Jeremiah said to Se·raiʹah: “When you come to Babylon and see her, you must read aloud all these words. 62 Then say, ‘O Jehovah, you have said against this place that it will be destroyed and left without an inhabitant, man or beast, and that she will become desolate forever.’ 63 And when you finish reading this book, tie a stone to it and throw it into the middle of the Eu·phraʹtes. 64 Then say, ‘This is how Babylon will sink down and never rise again because of the calamity that I am bringing on her; and they will grow weary.’”Down to this point are the words of Jeremiah.
52 Zed·e·kiʹah was 21 years old when he became king, and he reigned for 11 years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Ha·muʹtal the daughter of Jeremiah of Libʹnah. 2 He continued to do what was bad in Jehovah’s eyes, according to all that Je·hoiʹa·kim had done. 3 It was because of Jehovah’s anger that these things took place in Jerusalem and in Judah, until he cast them out of his sight. And Zed·e·kiʹah rebelled against the king of Babylon. 4 In the ninth year of Zed·e·kiʹah’s reign, in the tenth month, on the tenth day of the month, King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon came with all his army against Jerusalem. They camped against it and built a siege wall all around it. 5 And the city was under siege until the 11th year of King Zed·e·kiʹah.6 In the fourth month, on the ninth day of the month, the famine was severe in the city, and there was no food for the people of the land. 7 Finally the city wall was broken through, and all the soldiers fled from the city by night through the gate between the double wall near the king’s garden, while the Chal·deʹans were surrounding the city; and they continued by the way of the Arʹa·bah. 8 But the Chal·deʹan army pursued the king, and they overtook Zed·e·kiʹah in the desert plains of Jerʹi·cho, and all his troops were scattered from his side. 9 Then they seized the king and brought him up to the king of Babylon at Ribʹlah in the land of Haʹmath, and he passed sentence on him. 10 And the king of Babylon slaughtered Zed·e·kiʹah’s sons before his eyes, and he also slaughtered all the princes of Judah there at Ribʹlah. 11 Then the king of Babylon blinded Zed·e·kiʹah’s eyes, bound him with copper fetters, brought him to Babylon, and kept him imprisoned until the day of his death.12 In the fifth month, on the tenth day of the month, that is, in the 19th year of King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar the king of Babylon, Neb·uʹzar·adʹan the chief of the guard, who was an attendant of the king of Babylon, came into Jerusalem. 13 He burned down the house of Jehovah, the king’s house, and all the houses of Jerusalem; he also burned down every large house. 14 And the walls surrounding Jerusalem were pulled down by the entire Chal·deʹan army that was with the chief of the guard.15 Neb·uʹzar·adʹan the chief of the guard took into exile some of the lowly people and the rest of the people who were left in the city. He also took the deserters who had defected to the king of Babylon as well as the rest of the master craftsmen. 16 But Neb·uʹzar·adʹan the chief of the guard left some of the poorest people of the land to serve as vinedressers and as compulsory laborers.17 And the Chal·deʹans broke into pieces the copper pillars of the house of Jehovah and the carriages and the copper Sea that were in the house of Jehovah, and they carried all the copper away to Babylon. 18 They also took the cans, the shovels, the extinguishers, the bowls, the cups, and all the copper utensils used in the temple service. 19 The chief of the guard took the basins, the fire holders, the bowls, the cans, the lampstands, the cups, and the bowls that were of genuine gold and silver. 20 As for the two pillars, the Sea, the 12 copper bulls under the Sea, and the carriages that King Solʹo·mon had made for the house of Jehovah, the copper of all these articles was beyond weighing.21 As for the pillars, each pillar was 18 cubits high, a measuring cord of 12 cubits could encircle it; its thickness was four fingerbreadths, and it was hollow. 22 And the capital on it was of copper; and the height of the one capital was five cubits; and the network and pomegranates all around on the capital were all made of copper. The second pillar was just like it, also the pomegranates. 23 There were 96 pomegranates on the sides; in all, there were 100 pomegranates around the network.24 The chief of the guard also took Se·raiʹah the chief priest, Zeph·a·niʹah the second priest, and the three doorkeepers. 25 And he took from the city one court official who was the commissioner over the soldiers, seven close associates of the king who were found in the city, as well as the secretary of the chief of the army, the one mustering the people of the land, and 60 men of the common people of the land who were yet found in the city. 26 Neb·uʹzar·adʹan the chief of the guard took them and brought them to the king of Babylon at Ribʹlah. 27 The king of Babylon struck them down and put them to death at Ribʹlah in the land of Haʹmath. Thus Judah went into exile from its land.28 These are the people whom Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar took into exile: in the seventh year, 3,023 Jews.29 In the 18th year of Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar, 832 people were taken from Jerusalem.30 In the 23rd year of Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar, Neb·uʹzar·adʹan the chief of the guard took Jews into exile, 745 people.In all, 4,600 people were taken into exile.31 Then in the 37th year of the exile of King Je·hoiʹa·chin of Judah, in the 12th month, on the 25th day of the month, King Eʹvil-merʹo·dach of Babylon, in the year he became king, released King Je·hoiʹa·chin of Judah and brought him out of prison. 32 He spoke kindly with him and put his throne higher than the thrones of the other kings who were with him in Babylon. 33 So Je·hoiʹa·chin took off his prison garments, and he regularly ate before him all the days of his life. 34 A regular allowance of food was given him from the king of Babylon, day after day, until the day of his death, all the days of his life.
6 Take shelter, O sons of Benjamin, away from Jerusalem.Blow the horn in Te·koʹa;Light a fire signal over Beth-hac·cheʹrem!For a calamity looms from the north, a great disaster. 2 The daughter of Zion resembles a beautiful and delicate woman. 3 The shepherds and their droves will come.They will pitch their tents all around her,Each grazing the flock in his care. 4 “Prepare for war against her!Rise up, and let us attack her at midday!”“Woe to us, for the day is declining,For the shadows of evening are getting longer!” 5 “Rise up, and let us attack during the nightAnd destroy her fortified towers.” 6 For this is what Jehovah of armies says:“Cut down wood and raise up a siege rampart against Jerusalem.She is the city that must be held to account;There is nothing but oppression within her. 7 As a cistern keeps its water cool,So she keeps her wickedness cool.Violence and destruction are heard in her;Sickness and plague are constantly before me. 8 Be warned, O Jerusalem, or I will turn away from you in disgust;I will make you desolate, a land without inhabitants.” 9 This is what Jehovah of armies says:“They will thoroughly glean the remnant of Israel as the last grapes on a vine.Pass your hand again like one gathering grapes from the vines.”10 “To whom should I speak and give warning?Who will listen?Look! Their ears are closed, so that they are unable to pay attention.Look! The word of Jehovah has become something they scorn;They find no pleasure in it.11 So I am filled with the wrath of Jehovah,And I am tired of holding it in.”“Pour it out on the child in the street,On the groups of young men gathered together.They will all be captured, a man along with his wife,The old men along with the very old.12 Their houses will be turned over to others,Together with their fields and their wives.For I will stretch my hand out against the inhabitants of the land,” declares Jehovah.13 “For from the least to the greatest, each one is making dishonest gain;From the prophet to the priest, each one is practicing fraud.14 And they try to heal the breakdown of my people lightly, saying,‘There is peace! There is peace!’When there is no peace.15 Do they feel ashamed of the detestable things they have done?They feel no shame at all!They do not even know how to feel humiliated!So they will fall among the fallen.When I bring punishment on them they will stumble,” says Jehovah.16 This is what Jehovah says:“Stand at the crossroads and see.Ask about the ancient roadways,Ask where the good way is, and walk in it,And find rest for yourselves.”But they say: “We will not walk in it.”17 “And I appointed watchmen who said,‘Pay attention to the sound of the horn!’”But they said: “We will not pay attention.”18 “Therefore hear, O nations!And know, O assembly,What will happen to them.19 Listen, O earth!I am bringing calamity on this peopleAs the fruitage of their own schemes,For they paid no attention to my wordsAnd they rejected my law.”20 “What do I care that you bring frankincense from SheʹbaAnd sweet cane from a distant land?Your whole burnt offerings are not acceptable,And your sacrifices do not please me.”21 Therefore this is what Jehovah says:“Here I am setting for this people stumbling blocks,And they will stumble over them,Fathers and sons together,A neighbor and his companion,And they will all perish.”22 This is what Jehovah says:“Look! A people is coming from the land of the north,And a great nation will be awakened from the remotest parts of the earth.23 They will grab hold of the bow and the javelin.They are cruel and will have no mercy.Their voice will roar like the sea,And they ride on horses.They draw up in battle order like a man of war against you, O daughter of Zion.”24 We have heard the report about it.Our hands fall limp;Distress has seized us,Anguish like that of a woman giving birth.25 Do not go out into the field,And do not walk on the road,For the enemy has a sword;There is terror all around.26 O daughter of my people,Put on sackcloth and roll in the ashes.Mourn as for an only son, with bitter wailing,For suddenly the destroyer will come upon us.27 “I have made you a metal tester among my people,One making a thorough search;You must take note and examine their way.28 All of them are the most stubborn men,Walking about as slanderers.They are like copper and iron;All of them are corrupt.29 The bellows have been scorched.Out from their fire there is lead.One keeps refining intensely simply for nothing,And those who are bad have not been separated.30 Rejected silver is what people will certainly call them,For Jehovah has rejected them.”
7 This is the word that came to Jeremiah from Jehovah, saying: 2 “Stand in the gate of the house of Jehovah and proclaim there this message, ‘Hear the word of Jehovah, all you people of Judah who enter these gates to bow down to Jehovah. 3 This is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says: “Reform your ways and your actions, and I will allow you to keep residing in this place. 4 Do not put your trust in deceptive words and say, ‘This is the temple of Jehovah, the temple of Jehovah, the temple of Jehovah!’ 5 For if you truly reform your ways and actions; if you truly uphold justice between a man and his neighbor; 6 if you do not oppress foreign residents, orphans, and widows; if you do not shed innocent blood in this place; and if you do not follow other gods to your own harm; 7 then I will allow you to keep residing in this place, in the land I gave to your forefathers for all time.”’”8 “But you are putting your trust in deceptive words—it will bring absolutely no benefit. 9 Can you steal, murder, commit adultery, swear falsely, make sacrifices to Baʹal, and follow after gods you had not known, 10 and then come and stand before me in this house that bears my name and say, ‘We will be saved,’ despite your doing all these detestable things? 11 Has this house that bears my name become a cave of robbers in your eyes? Here I have seen it for myself,” declares Jehovah.12 “‘However, go now to my place in Shiʹloh, where I first caused my name to reside, and see what I did to it because of the badness of my people Israel. 13 But you kept doing all these things,’ declares Jehovah, ‘and even though I spoke to you again and again, you did not listen. I kept calling you, but you would not answer. 14 So I will do to the house that bears my name, in which you are trusting, and to this place that I gave to you and your forefathers, just as I did to Shiʹloh. 15 I will throw you out of my sight, just as I threw out all your brothers, all the descendants of Eʹphra·im.’16 “As for you, do not pray in behalf of this people. Do not cry out or offer a prayer or plead with me in their behalf, for I will not listen to you. 17 Do you not see what they are doing in the cities of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem? 18 The sons are gathering wood, the fathers are lighting the fire, and the wives are kneading dough in order to make sacrificial cakes to the Queen of Heaven, and they are pouring out drink offerings to other gods to offend me. 19 ‘But am I the one they are hurting?’ declares Jehovah. ‘Is it not they themselves, to their own shame?’ 20 Therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says, ‘Look! My anger and my wrath will be poured out on this place, on man and beast, on the trees of the field and the fruitage of the ground; it will burn and will not be extinguished.’21 “This is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says, ‘Go ahead, add your whole burnt offerings to your other sacrifices, and eat the flesh yourselves. 22 For on the day I brought your forefathers out of the land of Egypt, I did not speak with them or command them concerning whole burnt offerings and sacrifices. 23 But I did give them this command: “Obey my voice, and I will become your God, and you will become my people. You must walk in all the way that I command, so that it may go well with you.”’ 24 But they did not listen or incline their ear; instead, they walked in their own schemes, stubbornly following their wicked heart, and they went backward, not forward, 25 from the day your forefathers came out of the land of Egypt until this day. So I kept sending all my servants the prophets to you, sending them each day, again and again. 26 But they refused to listen to me, and they did not incline their ear. Instead, they were stubborn, and they acted worse than their forefathers!27 “You will speak all these words to them, but they will not listen to you; you will call to them, but they will not answer you. 28 And you will say to them, ‘This is the nation that did not obey the voice of Jehovah their God and refused to accept discipline. Faithfulness has perished and is not even mentioned among them.’29 “Shear off your uncut hair and throw it away, and on the bare hills raise a dirge, for Jehovah has rejected and will abandon this generation that has infuriated him. 30 ‘For the people of Judah have done what is bad in my eyes,’ declares Jehovah. ‘They have set up their disgusting idols in the house that bears my name, in order to defile it. 31 They have built the high places of Toʹpheth, which is in the Valley of the Son of Hinʹnom, in order to burn their sons and their daughters in the fire, something that I had not commanded and that had never even come into my heart.’32 “‘Therefore look! the days are coming,’ declares Jehovah, ‘when it will no longer be called Toʹpheth or the Valley of the Son of Hinʹnom but the Valley of the Slaughter. They will bury in Toʹpheth until there is no place left. 33 And the dead bodies of this people will become food for the birds of the heavens and for the beasts of the earth, with no one to frighten them away. 34 I will put an end to the sound of exultation and the sound of rejoicing, the voice of the bridegroom and the voice of the bride, in the cities of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem, for the land will be reduced to ruins.’”
8 “At that time,” declares Jehovah, “the bones of the kings of Judah, the bones of its princes, the bones of the priests, the bones of the prophets, and the bones of the inhabitants of Jerusalem will be taken from their graves. 2 They will be spread out to the sun and to the moon and to all the army of the heavens that they loved and served and followed and sought after and bowed down to. They will not be gathered, nor will they be buried. They will become like manure on the surface of the ground.”3 “And the remnant of this evil family who survive will choose death over life in all the places where I disperse them,” declares Jehovah of armies.4 “And you must say to them, ‘This is what Jehovah says:“Will they fall and not get up again?If one would turn back, will the other not also turn back? 5 Why is this people, Jerusalem, unfaithful with an enduring unfaithfulness?They hold fast to deception;They refuse to turn back. 6 I paid attention and kept listening, but the way they spoke was not right.Not a man repented over his wickedness or asked, ‘What have I done?’Each one keeps returning to the popular course, like a horse dashing into the battle. 7 Even the stork in the sky knows its seasons;The turtledove and the swift and the thrush keep to the time of their return.But my own people do not understand the judgment of Jehovah.”’ 8 ‘How can you say: “We are wise, and we have the law of Jehovah”?For in fact, the lying stylus of the scribes has been used only for falsehood. 9 The wise have been put to shame.They have become terrified and will be caught.Look! They have rejected the word of Jehovah,And what wisdom do they have?10 So I will give their wives to other men,Their fields to other owners;For from the least to the greatest, each one is making dishonest gain;From the prophet to the priest, each one is practicing fraud.11 And they try to heal the breakdown of the daughter of my people lightly, saying,“There is peace! There is peace!”When there is no peace.12 Do they feel ashamed of the detestable things they have done?They feel no shame at all!They do not even know how to feel humiliated!So they will fall among the fallen.When I bring punishment on them they will stumble,’ says Jehovah.13 ‘When I gather them, I will bring them to their end,’ declares Jehovah.‘There will be no grapes left on the vine, no figs on the fig tree, and the leaves will wither.And what I gave to them will be lost to them.’”14 “Why are we sitting here?Let us gather together and enter the fortified cities and perish there.For Jehovah our God will do away with us,And he gives us poisoned water to drink,Because we have sinned against Jehovah.15 There was a hope for peace, but nothing good came,For a time of healing, but there is terror!16 From Dan is heard the snorting of his horses.At the sound of the neighing of his stallions,The whole land quakes.They come in and devour the land and everything in it,The city and its inhabitants.”17 “For here I am sending in serpents among you,Poisonous snakes that cannot be charmed,And they will certainly bite you,” declares Jehovah.18 My grief is incurable;My heart is sick.19 From a distant land there is a cry for helpFrom the daughter of my people:“Is Jehovah not in Zion?Or is her king not in her?”“Why have they offended me with their graven images,With their worthless foreign gods?”20 “The harvest has passed, the summer has ended,But we have not been saved!”21 I am shattered over the breakdown of the daughter of my people;I am dejected.Horror has seized me.22 Is there no balsam in Gilʹe·ad?Or is there no healer there?Why has the daughter of my people not been restored to health?
9 O that my head were waters,My eyes a fountain of tears!Then I would weep day and nightFor the slain ones of my people. 2 O that I had a traveler’s lodging place in the wilderness!Then I would leave my people and go away from them,For they are all adulterers,A band of treacherous people. 3 They bend their tongue like a bow;Falsehood, not faithfulness, prevails in the land.“They advance from evil to evil,And they pay no attention to me,” declares Jehovah. 4 “Everyone, be on guard against your neighbor,And do not trust even your brother.For every brother is a betrayer,And every neighbor is a slanderer. 5 Each one cheats his neighbor,And no one speaks truth.They have taught their tongue to speak falsehood.They wear themselves out doing what is wrong. 6 You are living in the midst of deception.In their deception they refused to know me,” declares Jehovah. 7 Therefore this is what Jehovah of armies says:“I will smelt them and test them,For what else can I do with the daughter of my people? 8 Their tongue is a deadly arrow that speaks deception.With his mouth a person speaks of peace to his neighbor,But inside he lays an ambush.” 9 “Should I not call them to account for these things?” declares Jehovah.“Should I not avenge myself on such a nation?10 I will weep and lament over the mountainsAnd take up a dirge over the pastures of the wilderness,For they have been burned up so that no man passes through,And the sound of livestock is not heard.The birds of heaven and the beasts have fled; they are gone.11 I will make Jerusalem piles of stones, the lair of jackals,And I will make the cities of Judah desolate, without an inhabitant.12 Who is wise enough to understand this?To whom has the mouth of Jehovah spoken, that he may declare it?Why has the land perished?Why is it scorched like the wilderness,So that no one is passing through?”13 Jehovah replied: “Because of their rejecting my law that I set before them, and because they have not followed it and obeyed my voice. 14 Instead, they stubbornly followed their own hearts, and they followed the Baʹal images, as their fathers had taught them to do. 15 Therefore this is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says, ‘Here I am making this people eat wormwood, and I will make them drink poisoned water. 16 I will scatter them among the nations that they and their fathers have not known, and I will send a sword after them until I will have exterminated them.’17 This is what Jehovah of armies says,‘Behave with understanding.Summon the women who sing dirges,And send for the skilled women to come,18 So that they may hurry and raise a lamentation for us,So that our eyes may stream with tearsAnd our eyelids trickle with water.19 For the sound of lamentation has been heard from Zion:“How we have been devastated!How great our shame is!For we have left the land, and they have thrown down our homes.”20 You women, hear the word of Jehovah.May your ear receive the word of his mouth.Teach your daughters this lamentation,And teach one another this dirge.21 For death has come up through our windows;It has entered our fortified towersTo take away the children from the streetsAnd the young men from the public squares.’22 Say, ‘This is what Jehovah declares:“The dead bodies of people will fall like manure on the surface of the field,Like a row of newly cut grain after the reaper,With no one to gather them up.”’”23 This is what Jehovah says:“Let not the wise man boast about his wisdom;Let not the mighty man boast about his mightiness;And let not the rich man boast about his riches.”24 “But let the one boasting boast about this:That he has insight and knowledge of me,That I am Jehovah, the One showing loyal love, justice, and righteousness in the earth,For in these things I take delight,” declares Jehovah.25 “Look! Days are coming,” declares Jehovah, “and I will hold an accounting with everyone circumcised and yet uncircumcised, 26 with Egypt and Judah and Eʹdom and the Amʹmon·ites and Moʹab and with all of those with hair clipped at the temples who are dwelling in the wilderness; for all the nations are uncircumcised, and all the house of Israel are uncircumcised in heart.”
1 These are the words of Jeremiah the son of Hil·kiʹah, one of the priests in Anʹa·thoth in the land of Benjamin. 2 The word of Jehovah came to him in the days of Jo·siʹah the son of Aʹmon, the king of Judah, in the 13th year of his reign. 3 It came also in the days of Je·hoiʹa·kim the son of Jo·siʹah, the king of Judah, until the completion of the 11th year of Zed·e·kiʹah the son of Jo·siʹah, the king of Judah, until Jerusalem went into exile in the fifth month.4 The word of Jehovah came to me, saying: 5 “Before I formed you in the womb I knew you,And before you were born I sanctified you.I made you a prophet to the nations.” 6 But I said: “Alas, O Sovereign Lord Jehovah!I do not know how to speak, for I am just a boy.” 7 Jehovah then said to me:“Do not say, ‘I am just a boy.’For you must go to all those to whom I send you,And you should say everything that I command you. 8 Do not be afraid because of their appearance,For ‘I am with you to save you,’ declares Jehovah.”9 Then Jehovah stretched out his hand and touched my mouth. And Jehovah said to me: “I have put my words in your mouth. 10 See, I have commissioned you this day to be over the nations and over the kingdoms, to uproot and to pull down, to destroy and to tear down, to build and to plant.”11 The word of Jehovah again came to me, saying: “What do you see, Jeremiah?” So I said: “I see the branch of an almond tree.”12 Jehovah said to me: “You have seen correctly, for I am wide awake concerning my word to carry it out.”13 The word of Jehovah came to me a second time, saying: “What do you see?” So I said: “I see a boiling pot, and its mouth is tilted away from the north.” 14 Then Jehovah said to me:“Out of the north the calamity will break looseAgainst all the inhabitants of the land.15 For ‘I am summoning all the families of the kingdoms of the north,’ declares Jehovah,‘And they will come; each one will set up his throneAt the entrance of the gates of Jerusalem,Against her walls all aroundAnd against all the cities of Judah.16 And I will declare my judgments against them over all their wickedness,Because they have abandoned me,And they are making sacrificial smoke to other godsAnd bowing down to the works of their own hands.’17 But you should prepare for action,And you must stand up and tell them everything that I command you.Do not be terrified of them,So that I do not terrify you before them.18 For today I have made you a fortified city,An iron pillar, and copper walls against all the land,Toward the kings of Judah and her princes,Toward her priests and the people of the land.19 And they will certainly fight against you,But they will not prevail against you,For ‘I am with you,’ declares Jehovah, ‘to save you.’”
2 How Jehovah has covered the daughter of Zion in the cloud of his anger!He has thrown down the beauty of Israel from heaven to earth.He has not remembered his footstool in the day of his anger. 2 Jehovah has swallowed up without compassion all the dwellings of Jacob.In his fury he has torn down the fortified places of the daughter of Judah.He has brought down to the ground and profaned the kingdom and her princes. 3 In the heat of anger he has cut down all the strength of Israel.He withdrew his right hand when the enemy approached,And in Jacob he kept burning like a fire that consumed everything around it. 4 He has bent his bow like an enemy; his right hand is poised as an adversary;He kept killing all those desirable to the eyes.And he poured out his wrath like a fire into the tent of the daughter of Zion. 5 Jehovah has become like an enemy;He has swallowed down Israel.He has swallowed down all her towers;He has destroyed all its fortified places.And in the daughter of Judah he makes mourning and lamentation abound. 6 He treats his booth violently, like a hut in a garden.He has put an end to his festival.Jehovah has caused festival and sabbath to be forgotten in Zion,And in his fierce indignation he shows no regard for king and priest. 7 Jehovah has rejected his altar;He has spurned his sanctuary.He has surrendered the walls of her fortified towers into the hand of the enemy.They have raised their voice in the house of Jehovah, as on the day of a festival. 8 Jehovah has resolved to destroy the wall of the daughter of Zion.He has stretched out the measuring line.He has not held back his hand from bringing destruction.And he causes rampart and wall to mourn.Together they have been made weak. 9 Her gates have sunk down into the earth.He has destroyed and broken her bars.Her king and her princes are among the nations.There is no law; even her prophets find no vision from Jehovah.10 The elders of the daughter of Zion sit on the ground in silence.They throw dust on their heads and wear sackcloth.The virgins of Jerusalem have bowed their heads down to the ground.11 My eyes are worn out from shedding tears.My insides are churning.My liver has been poured out on the ground, because of the downfall of the daughter of my people,Because of the children and infants fainting away in the public squares of the town.12 They keep asking their mothers, “Where are grain and wine?”As they faint away like someone wounded in the public squares of the city,As their life ebbs away in their mothers’ arms.13 What can I use as a witness,Or to what can I liken you, O daughter of Jerusalem?To what can I compare you, to comfort you, O virgin daughter of Zion?For your breakdown is as vast as the sea. Who can heal you?14 The visions your prophets saw for you were false and empty,And they did not expose your error in order to turn away your captivity,But they kept visioning for you false and misleading pronouncements.15 At you all those passing by on the road scornfully clap their hands.They whistle in amazement and shake their heads at the daughter of Jerusalem, saying:“Is this the city about which they said, ‘It is perfect in beauty, the joy of all the earth’?”16 At you all your enemies have opened their mouth.They whistle and grind their teeth and say: “We have swallowed her down.This is the day we were waiting for! It has arrived, and we have seen it!”17 Jehovah has done what he intended; he has carried out his saying,What he commanded long ago.He has torn down without compassion.He has let the enemy rejoice over you; he has exalted the strength of your adversaries.18 Their heart cries out to Jehovah, O wall of the daughter of Zion.Let tears stream down like a torrent day and night.Give yourself no respite, give your eye no rest.19 Rise up! Cry out during the night, at the start of the watches.Pour out your heart like water before the face of Jehovah.Raise your hands to him for the lives of your children,Who are fainting away at every street corner because of famine.20 See, O Jehovah, and look upon the one with whom you have dealt so harshly.Should women keep eating their own offspring, their own fully formed children,Or should priests and prophets be killed in the sanctuary of Jehovah?21 Young boy and old man are lying dead on the ground in the streets.My virgins and my young men have fallen by the sword.You have killed in the day of your anger; you have slaughtered without compassion.22 As if for a festival day, you summon terrors from every direction.In the day of the wrath of Jehovah, no one escaped or survived;Those whom I gave birth to and reared, my enemy exterminated.
3 I am the man who has seen affliction because of the rod of his fury. 2 He has driven me out and makes me walk in darkness, not in light. 3 Indeed, he repeatedly brings his hand against me all day long. 4 He has worn away my flesh and my skin;He has broken my bones. 5 He has besieged me; he has surrounded me with bitter poison and hardship.  6 He has forced me to sit in dark places, like men who died long ago. 7 He has walled me in, so that I cannot escape;He has bound me with heavy copper fetters. 8 And when I cry out desperately for help, he rejects my prayer.  9 He has blocked up my paths with hewn stones;He has made my roadways crooked.10 He waits to ambush me like a bear, like a lion in hiding.11 He has forced me off the paths and torn me to pieces;He has made me desolate.12 He has bent his bow, and he sets me up as the target for the arrow.13 He has pierced my kidneys with the arrows of his quiver.14 I have become a laughingstock to all the peoples, the theme of their song all day long.15 He has filled me with bitter things and saturated me with wormwood.16 He breaks my teeth with gravel;He makes me cower in the ashes.17 You deprive me of peace; I have forgotten what is good.18 So I say: “My splendor has perished, as well as my expectation in Jehovah.”19 Remember my affliction and my homeless state, the wormwood and the bitter poison.20 You will surely remember and bow low over me.21 I recall this in my heart; that is why I will show a waiting attitude.22 It is because of Jehovah’s loyal love that we have not come to our finish,For his mercies never end.23 They are new each morning; your faithfulness is abundant.24 “Jehovah is my share,” I have said, “that is why I will show a waiting attitude for him.”25 Good is Jehovah to the one hoping in him, to the person who keeps seeking him.26 Good it is to wait in silence for the salvation of Jehovah.27 Good it is for a man to carry the yoke during his youth.28 Let him sit alone and keep silent when He lays it upon him.29 Let him put his mouth in the very dust; there may yet be hope.30 Let him give his cheek to the one striking him; let him have his fill of insults.31 For Jehovah will not cast us off forever.32 Although he has caused grief, he will also show mercy according to his abundant loyal love.33 For it is not in his heart to afflict or grieve the sons of men.34 To crush beneath one’s feet all the prisoners of the earth,35 To deprive a man of justice in the presence of the Most High,36 To defraud a man in his legal case—Jehovah does not tolerate such things.37 Who, then, can speak and have it happen unless Jehovah commands it?38 From the mouth of the Most High,Bad things and good things do not go out together.39 Why should a living person complain about the consequences of his sin?40 Let us examine and scrutinize our ways, and let us return to Jehovah.41 Let us lift up our hearts along with our hands to God in the heavens:42 “We have transgressed and rebelled, and you have not forgiven.43 With anger you have blocked our approach;You have pursued and killed us without compassion.44 You have blocked approach to yourself with a cloud, so that our prayer may not pass through.45 You make us offscouring and refuse among the peoples.”46 All our enemies open their mouths against us.47 Dread and pitfalls have become our lot, desolation and breakdown.48 Streams of water flow from my eyes over the breakdown of the daughter of my people.49 My eyes weep without ceasing, without pausing,50 Until Jehovah looks down and sees from heaven.51 My eyes have brought me grief because of all the daughters of my city.52 Without cause my enemies have hunted me down like a bird.53 They have silenced my life in the pit; they kept hurling stones at me.54 Waters flowed over my head, and I said: “I am finished!”55 I called out your name, O Jehovah, from the depths of the pit.56 Hear my voice; do not shut your ear to my cry for help, for relief.57 You drew near in the day that I called you. You said: “Do not be afraid.”58 You have defended my cause, O Jehovah, you have redeemed my life.59 You have seen, O Jehovah, the wrong done to me; please grant me justice.60 You have seen all their vengeance, all their schemes against me. o61 You have heard their taunts, O Jehovah, all their schemes against me,62 The lips of my opposers and their whispering against me all day long.63 Look at them; whether they sit or stand, they mock me in their songs!64 You will repay them, O Jehovah, according to their deeds.65 You will make them hardhearted, as your curse to them.66 You will pursue them in your anger and annihilate them from under the heavens of Jehovah.
4 How the shining gold has grown dim, the fine gold!How the holy stones lie scattered at every street corner! 2 As for the precious sons of Zion, who were weighed against refined gold,How they have been regarded as earthenware jars,The work of a potter’s hands! 3 Even jackals offer the udder to nurse their young,But the daughter of my people has become cruel, like ostriches in the wilderness. 4 The tongue of the nursing infant sticks to its palate because of thirst.Children beg for bread, but no one gives them any. 5 Those who used to eat delicacies lie famished in the streets.Those who were brought up wearing scarlet have embraced ash heaps. 6 The punishment of the daughter of my people is greater than the punishment for the sin of Sodʹom,Which was overthrown in a moment, with no hand to help her. 7 Her Nazʹi·rites were purer than snow, whiter than milk.They were more ruddy than corals; they were like polished sapphires. 8 Their appearance has become darker than soot;They are not recognized in the streets.Their skin has shriveled over their bones; it has become like dry wood. 9 Those slain with the sword are better off than those slain by famine,Those who waste away, who are pierced through for lack of food from the field.10 The hands of compassionate women have boiled their own children.They have become their food of mourning during the breakdown of the daughter of my people.11 Jehovah has expressed his wrath;He has poured out his burning anger.And he starts a fire in Zion that consumes her foundations.12 The kings of the earth and all the inhabitants of the productive land did not believeThat the adversary and the enemy would enter the gates of Jerusalem.13 It was because of the sins of her prophets, the errors of her priests,Who shed the blood of righteous ones in her midst.14 They have wandered blindly in the streets.They are polluted with blood,So that none are able to touch their garments.15 “Go away! Unclean!” they call out to them. “Go away! Go away! Do not touch us!”For they have gone homeless and wander about.People have said among the nations: “They cannot stay here with us.16 The face of Jehovah has scattered them;He will no longer look favorably on them.Men will show no respect for the priests, no favor to the elders.”17 Even now our eyes are worn out from looking in vain for help.We looked and looked for help from a nation that could not save us.18 They have hunted us down at every step so that we could not walk in our public squares.Our end has drawn near; our days have finished, for our end has come.19 Our pursuers were swifter than the eagles of the sky.They chased us on the mountains; they ambushed us in the wilderness.20 The breath of our nostrils, the anointed one of Jehovah, has been captured in their large pit,The one of whom we said: “In his shade we will live among the nations.”21 Exult and rejoice, O daughter of Eʹdom, living as you do in the land of Uz.But to you also the cup will be passed, and you will become drunk and expose your nakedness.22 The punishment for your error, O daughter of Zion, has come to its finish.He will not carry you off into exile again.But he will turn his attention to your error, O daughter of Eʹdom.He will uncover your sins.
5 Remember, O Jehovah, what has befallen us.Look and see our disgrace. 2 Our inheritance has been turned over to strangers, our houses to foreigners. 3 We have become orphans without a father; our mothers are like widows. 4 We must pay to drink our own water, and our own wood comes at a price. 5 Those pursuing us are at our neck;We are weary, but we are given no rest. 6 We hold out our hand to Egypt and to As·syrʹi·a, to get enough bread to eat. 7 Our forefathers who sinned are no more, but we must bear their errors. 8 Servants now rule over us; there is no one to snatch us from their hand. 9 We bring in our bread at the risk of our life, because of the sword of the wilderness.10 Our skin has become as hot as a furnace, because of the pangs of hunger.11 The wives in Zion they have humiliated, the virgins in the cities of Judah.12 Princes were hanged by their hand, and elders were shown no respect.13 Young men carry the hand mill, and boys stumble under loads of wood.14 The elders are gone from the city gate; young men do not play their music.15 The joy is gone from our heart; our dancing has turned into mourning.16 The crown has fallen from our head. Woe to us, because we have sinned!17 Because of this our heart is sick,And because of these things our eyes have grown dim,18 Because of Mount Zion, which is desolate; foxes now roam on it.19 As for you, O Jehovah, you sit enthroned forever.Your throne is for generation after generation.20 Why do you forget us forever and abandon us for so long a time?21 Bring us back to yourself, O Jehovah, and we will readily return to you.Renew our days as in those of old.22 However, you have utterly rejected us.You remain intensely angry with us.
1 How she now sits all alone, the city that was full of people!How she has become like a widow, she who was populous among the nations!How she who was a princess among the provinces has been put to forced labor! 2 She weeps profusely during the night, and her tears cover her cheeks.Not one of all her lovers is there to comfort her.All her own companions have betrayed her; they have become her enemies. 3 Judah has gone into exile under affliction and harsh slavery.She must dwell among the nations; she finds no resting-place.All her persecutors have overtaken her in her distress. 4 The roads to Zion are mourning, because no one is coming to the festival.All her gates are desolate; her priests are sighing.Her virgins are grieving, and she is in bitter anguish. 5 Her adversaries are now her master; her enemies are carefree.For Jehovah has brought grief to her because of her many transgressions.Her children have gone into captivity before the adversary. 6 All the splendor has departed from the daughter of Zion.Her princes are like stags that have found no pasture,And they walk exhausted before the pursuer. 7 In the days of her affliction and her homelessness, Jerusalem remembersAll the precious things that were hers in the days of long ago.When her people fell into the hand of the adversary and she had no helper,The adversaries saw her and laughed over her collapse. 8 Jerusalem has sinned greatly.That is why she has become something abhorrent.All who used to honor her now treat her as something contemptible, for they have seen her nakedness.She herself groans and turns away in shame. 9 Her uncleanness is in her skirts.She gave no thought to her future.Her downfall was astounding; she has no one to comfort her.O Jehovah, see my affliction, for the enemy has magnified himself.10 The adversary has laid his hands on all her treasures.For she has seen nations enter her sanctuary,Those whom you commanded should not enter into your congregation.11 All her people are sighing; they are looking for bread.They have given their valuable things for something to eat, just to stay alive.Look, O Jehovah, and see that I have become as a worthless woman.12 Is it nothing to all of you who pass along the road?Look and see!Is there any pain like the pain that was dealt out to me,Which Jehovah made me suffer in the day of his burning anger?13 From on high he has sent fire into my bones, and he subdues each one.He has spread out a net for my feet; he has forced me to turn backward.He has made me a desolate woman.All day long I am ill.14 My transgressions are bound as a yoke, fastened together by his hand.They have been placed on my neck, and my strength has failed.Jehovah has given me into the hand of those whom I cannot resist.15 Jehovah has tossed aside all the powerful men in my midst.He has summoned an assembly against me to crush my young men.Jehovah has trodden the virgin daughter of Judah in the winepress.16 I am weeping because of these things; my eyes flow with tears.For anyone who could comfort me or refresh me is far away from me.My sons are desolate, for the enemy has prevailed.17 Zion has spread out her hands; she has no one to comfort her.Jehovah has given an order against Jacob to all his adversaries around him.Jerusalem has become to them an abhorrent thing.18 Jehovah is righteous, for it is against his commands that I have rebelled.Listen, all you peoples, and see my pain.My virgins and my young men have gone into captivity.19 I have called out to my lovers, but they have betrayed me.In the city my priests and my elders have perished,While they searched for food in order to stay alive.20 See, O Jehovah, for I am in great distress.My insides are churning.My heart has turned over within me, for I have been completely rebellious.Outside the sword bereaves; inside the house it is like death.21 People have heard my sighing; there is no one to comfort me.All my enemies have heard of my calamity.They are joyful, because you brought it about.But you will bring about the day that you proclaimed, when they will become like me.